

=== PAGE 1 ===
Player’s Book
A dv ent ur e A nd Per il in FA iry tA le Woods

=== PAGE 2 ===


=== PAGE 3 ===
Player’s BookPlayer’s Book
Version June, 2025
Writing: Gavin Norman. Additional writing: Greg Gorgonmilk, Amelia Luke, James Spahn, Brian Yaksha. Game design
consultant: James Spahn. Editing: Gavin Norman, Caleb Stokes, Rabbit Stoddard. Layout: Gavin Norman. Visual design:
Vasili Kaliman, Gavin Norman. Art direction: Gavin Norman, David Hoskins. Cover art: Ulla Thynell. Back cover design:
Chandler Kennedy. Art: Lorenzo Colangeli, Pauliina Hannuniemi, Jana Heidersdorf, Aaron Howdle, Chris Huth, Tom
Kilian, Elliot Lang, Ellie Livingston, Kyle Patterson, Rachel Quinlan, Mish Scott, Ulla Thynell, Andrew Walter, Letty Wilson.
Dolmenwood player’s map: Jonathan Newell, coloured by Zach Kallas. Dolmenwood logo: Tim Hastings (Mindkillerink).
Text and design © 2024 Necrotic Gnome. Dolmenwood® and all related characters and elements © 2024 Necrotic Gnome.
All Rights Reserved.
This work includes material taken from the System Reference Document 5.1 (“SRD 5.1”) by Wizards of the Coast LLC and
available at https://dnd.wizards.com/resources/systems-reference-document. The SRD 5.1 is licensed under the Creative
Commons Attribution 4.0 International License available at https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/legalcode.

=== PAGE 4 ===
Table of Contents
4 Welcome to DolmenWooD
The Journey Begins 6
Folk and Factions 8
Dolmenwood Gazetteer 9
11 Starting Play
On Role-Playing Games 12
Terminology 14
Character Statistics 16
Creating a Character 18
Example of Creating a Character 20
Ability Scores 22
Alignment 24
Advancement 25
Languages 26
28 KinDreDS
Mortals, Fairies, and Demi-Fey 30
Breggle 32
Elf 36
Grimalkin 40
Human 44
Mossling 48
Woodgrue 52
57 claSSeS
Bard 58
Cleric 60
Enchanter 62
Fighter 64
Friar 66
Hunter 68
Knight 70
Magician 72
Thief 74
76 magic
Arcane Magic 78
Rank 1 Arcane Spells 80
Rank 2 Arcane Spells 82
Rank 3 Arcane Spells 84
Rank 4 Arcane Spells 86
Rank 5 Arcane Spells 88
Rank 6 Arcane Spells 90
Fairy Magic 92
Glamours 94
Lesser Runes 97
Greater Runes 98
Mighty Runes 99
Holy Magic 100
Rank 1 Holy Spells 102
Rank 2 Holy Spells 104
Rank 3 Holy Spells 106
Rank 4 Holy Spells 108
Rank 5 Holy Spells 110
Mossling Knacks 112
115 equiPment, ServiceS, anD
animalS
Adventuring Gear 116
Armour and Weapons 118
Horses and Vehicles 120
Hounds 122
Lodgings and Food 124
Beverages 126
Pipeleaf 128
Common Fungi and Herbs 130
Specialist Services 132
Retainers 134

=== PAGE 5 ===
136 aDventuring
Basic Game Procedure 138
Example of Play 140
Preparing for an Adventure 142
Core Rules 144
Skill Checks 144
Ability Checks 144
Saving Throws 145
Attack Rolls 145
Time and Movement 146
Encumbrance 148
Hazards and Challenges 150
Narrative Interaction 150
Climbing 150
Cold 150
Darkness and Blindness 150
Doors 151
Exhaustion 151
Falling 151
Finding Food in the Wild 152
Hidden Features 152
Hunger and Thirst 153
Jumping 153
Losing Direction 153
Stealth 154
Suffocation 154
Swimming 154
Traps 155
Wandering Monsters 155
Travel 156
Camping 158
Settlements 160
Dungeons 162
Encounters 164
Combat 166
Other Combat Matters 168
Example of Combat 170
173 aPPenDiceS
Dolmenwood Calendar 174
Noble Houses of Dolmenwood 176
Religion in Dolmenwood 178
Breggle Kindred-Class 180
Elf Kindred-Class 182
Grimalkin Kindred-Class 184
Mossling Kindred-Class 186
Woodgrue Kindred-Class 188
Thanks 190
Credits 192

=== PAGE 6 ===
Part One
Welcome to
Dolmenwood

=== PAGE 7 ===
D
olmenwood? Well, let me tell ye, everything you ever
heard about the Wood is true and everything you
ever heard is false. Dreams and fairies walk between
standing stones and dancing trees, slipping in and out of the
mortal world as easily as you or I slip through an open door.
It’s right pretty though. Dare I say, beautiful even. All manner
of enchantment lingers beneath its boughs. It’ll capture your
heart if ye let it. And that sounds as lovely as a song until you
realise the Wood’ll never, ever give it back without paying the
proper cost.”
—Ogham Tweede, bartender
“

=== PAGE 8 ===
6
P a r t o n e | W e l c o m e t o D o l m e n W o o D
The Journey Begins
A wanderer’s first steps into the tricksome and beguiling Dolmenwood.A wanderer’s first steps into the tricksome and beguiling Dolmenwood.
T
his book is a gateway to adventure in the beguil-
ing realm of Dolmenwood—a swathe of tangled
woods, fungus-encrusted glades, and foetid
marsh on the wild borders of civilisation. Rife with
intrigue, secrets, and magic, Dolmenwood draws travel-
lers of adventurous spirit, daring them to venture within.
Explore the wild places of the Wood, travelling through
bramble-choked dells, fungal forests, and accursed
bogland, bedding down among root and bracken amid
the nocturnal babbling of strange beasts.
Unearth treasure hoards in forgotten fairy ruins, haunted
manors, dripping caverns, crystal grottoes, unhallowed
barrow mounds, and abandoned delvings.
Confront fell beasts, roving fungal monstrosities, terrible
wyrms, tricksome fairies, and restless spirits of the long
deceased.
Recover saintly relics and shrines lost in the befuddling
tangle of the Wood, gaining the favour of the Church by
returning them to civilisation.
Forage for weird fungi and herbs in the untrod depths of
the woods, many with useful magical powers—and many
that can be sold for profit.
Strike against Chaos, defending civilisation from the
encroaching forces of the wicked, half-unicorn Nag-Lord
who lurks in the corrupted northern woods.
Unravel secrets of deep magic, charting the obelisks,
dolmens, and ley lines littered throughout Dolmenwood—
but beware the sinister Drune cult that wards them.
Seek the counsel of witches or the sinister Hag, wielders
of magic that can heal, hex, or divine the future.
Meddle in the affairs of nobility, allying with a noble
house in its intrigues and power plays in the courts of
High-Hankle and Castle Brackenwold.
Journey along fairy roads, ancient magical paths border-
ing on the ageless world of Fairy that allow travel through-
out Dolmenwood—and perchance to realms beyond.
Return to the homely hearth to share tales of peril with
quaint locals over a mug of ale and a well-stoked pipe.
Inspirational Media
The following books, films, and television series
inspired the creation of Dolmenwood. They are recom-
mended as imagination fodder for all players.
Books
▶ The Charwoman’s Shadow—Lord Dunsany
▶ The Fellowship of the Ring (Book 1)—J.R.R. Tolkien
▶ Goblin Market—Christina Rossetti
▶ Gormenghast—Mervyn Peake
▶ Jonathan Strange & Mr Norrell—Susanna Clarke
▶ The King of Elfland’s Daughter—Lord Dunsany
▶ Krabat—Ottfried Preußler
▶ The Ladies of Grace Adieu—Susanna Clarke
▶ Lud-in-the-Mist—Hope Mirrlees
▶ Lyonesse trilogy—Jack Vance
▶ Mio My Son—Astrid Lindgren
▶ On Fairy-Stories—J.R.R. Tolkien
▶ Smith of Wootton Major—J.R.R. Tolkien
▶ Stardust—Neil Gaiman
▶ The White People—Arthur Machen
Films
▶ The Green Knight—David Lowery
▶ Labyrinth—Jim Henson
▶ Legend—Ridley Scott
▶ Princess Mononoke—Hayao Miyazaki
▶ Spirited Away—Hayao Miyazaki
▶ The Wicker Man—Robin Hardy
Television Series
▶ Jonathan Strange & Mr Norrell—BBC series
▶ Over the Garden Wall—Patrick McHale
▶ Twin Peaks—Mark Frost and David Lynch

=== PAGE 9 ===
P a r t o n e | W e l c o m e t o D o l m e n W o o D
7
WHAT’S IN THIS BOOK?
This book contains everything players need to experience
wondrous journeys and perilous adventure in the befud-
dling and magical Dolmenwood. It guides players on their
first steps beneath the forest’s benighted eaves and serves
as a trusty companion as they delve deeper into its secrets.
Part 1: Welcome to Dolmenwood
Reveals common knowledge about the people, places, and
factions of Dolmenwood that can be gleaned by talking
with its natives.
Part 2: Starting Play
Introduces the basics of role-playing games, along with
instructions on how to create a character to begin explor-
ing Dolmenwood.
Part 3: Kindreds
Describes the six most common Kindreds of sentient folk
in Dolmenwood. Players may be a proud, goat-headed breg-
gle, a wide-eyed elf stepped straight from Fairy, a trick-
some grimalkin cat-fairy, a worldly or hapless human, a
fungus-riddled mossling, or a capricious, bat-faced wood-
grue.
Part 4: Classes
Describes nine adventuring professions that define a char-
acter’s talents and powers, as well as their role in an adven-
turing party. Players may be a charming bard, an ardent
cleric, a wilful enchanter, a dashing fighter, a jolly friar, a
stealthy hunter, a haughty knight, an enigmatic magician,
or a wily thief.
Part 5: Magic
Elucidates the many kinds of magic available to Player
Characters—arcane spells, holy prayers, fairy glamours,
elf runes, and the humble magical knacks of mosslings.
Part 6: Equipment, Services, Animals
Presents a rich and detailed selection of gear, armour,
weapons, mounts, vehicles, services, and accoutrements
essential to any adventurer, including a miscellany of pipe-
leafs, beverages, and useful herbs and fungi.
Part 7: Adventuring
Explains the rules and procedures for adventuring in
Dolmenwood—travelling and camping in the wilds,
exploring weird subterranean locales, and battling fero-
cious monsters.
Part 8: Appendices
Provides additional background information on the calen-
dar, noble houses, and religions of Dolmenwood, along
with optional rules for archetypal non-human characters.
Inside Covers
Player’s map of Dolmenwood: Dolmenwood as described
by local folk, including the purported locations of certain
sites mentioned in legend and folklore.
Quick reference: Commonly used tables and rules summa-
ries compiled for quick reference.
OTHER BOOKS
Referees wishing to run games set in Dolmenwood require
additional books, revealing the deep mysteries of the
Wood.
The Dolmenwood Campaign Book: An exhaustive tome
detailing the secrets and lore of Dolmenwood, including
hundreds of fantastic and perilous locations.
The Dolmenwood Monster Book: A menagerie of weird
beasts, fickle fairies, and strange spirits that inhabit the
wild places of the Wood.
Dolmenwood adventure scenarios: A series of adventures
set in Dolmenwood, presented in an easy-to-use format,
perfect for the time-pressed Referee.
FREE DOWNLOADS
Visit dolmenwood.com for Dolmenwood character sheets,
calendars, and more.
Book Title Acronyms
The following acronyms are sometimes used when
referring to other books:
DCB: The Dolmenwood Campaign Book.
DMB: The Dolmenwood Monster Book.

=== PAGE 10 ===
8
P a r t o n e | W e l c o m e t o D o l m e n W o o D
Folk and Factions
Introducing the folk of Dolmenwood and the factions that vie for control.Introducing the folk of Dolmenwood and the factions that vie for control.
SENTIENT FOLK
While humans dominate the settled reaches of Dolmen-
wood, they are not the only folk to call the place home.
Breggles
The High Wold region of south-western Dolmenwood has
been ruled since ancient times by the goat-headed breg-
gles. Breggles divide themselves into two castes, distin-
guished by the length of their horns—the aristocratic
longhorns and the commoner shorthorns.
Mosslings
The dank, fungal-infested lowlands of Mulchgrove, in the
eastern woods, are home to a shy and stunted folk called
mosslings, part mortal flesh and part plant or fungus.
Fairies and Demi-Fey
Among the myriad peoples of Fairy, a number venture
into Dolmenwood and mingle with mortal folk: elves,
otherworldly and beautiful, the little cat-folk known
as grimalkins, and bat-faced woodgrues are the most
commonly encountered.
Other Sentient Beings
If one ventures off the beaten track in Dolmenwood,
innumerable creatures await discovery. Goblin tricksters
peddle fairy fruits and other questionable wares; scrabies
emerge from their network of tunnels, eager to explore;
even a bird or animal may surprise travellers by greeting
them from the wayside, spinning a riddle, or cursing their
trespass.
FACTIONS AND POWERS
The Duchy of Brackenwold
Ruling from the supposedly impregnable Castle Bracken-
wold on the south-eastern verge of the forest, the Dukes
of Brackenwold trace their line back to the earliest settlers
in the region. All mortal folk within the Wood—from the
humblest beggar to the highest lord—pay fealty to the
duke. The whole forest is his property.
The Pluritine Church
The monotheistic Pluritine Church dominates throughout
Dolmenwood and beyond. While it holds much political
clout, the Church is of late diminished in Dolmenwood.
Many shrines and chapels that once saw regular worship
have fallen into ruin and been reclaimed by the forest.
Some within the Church seek to rediscover and re-sanctify
these lost shrines.
The Cold Prince
Where mortals now reign, great fairy nobles once held
court. The entirety of Dolmenwood was once the domain
of a cruel elf lord known as the Cold Prince, lord of winter
eternal, who ruled from the palace of Hoarblight Keep
overlooking the great Lake Longmere. When humans
began to settle the wild glades a great war between fairy
and mortal ensued. Mortals eventually prevailed and the
Cold Prince was banished to his domain in Fairy. Fearful
tales of his return to Dolmenwood and his icy wrath weave
a common thread through the folklore of those who dwell
within his erstwhile domain.
The Nag-Lord
A wicked, trickster figure of local folklore, said to keep
unholy court in the twisted northern woods, where his
armies of corrupted breggles and other creatures of Chaos
lair. The Nag-Lord is known in folktales as the “King of the
Wood,” and is portrayed as being part man, part unicorn,
with nine legs (nine being regarded as an especially
accursed number).
The Drune
A cabal of sorcerers who roam the Wood, cloaked in black.
They claim the magical energies of Dolmenwood and what
gods they worship is a matter of conjecture, for they guard
their secrets with their lives. In the eyes of the Church they
are heathens to be eradicated, for it is said they deal in
devil worship and human sacrifice. Kidnap by the Drune
is among the greatest fears of the simple folk of Dolmen-
wood, who refer to the cult as “the Hooded Men,” fearing
to speak the word “Drune.”
The Witches
Mortal women who worship ancient deities in the forbid-
den depths of Dolmenwood. Their aims are obscure, but
it is known that they gather beneath the moon to work
magic. In folklore, witches are variously portrayed as
depraved practitioners of human sacrifice, treacherous
wielders of hex and illusion, and ministers of potent cures
and charms.
Ygraine the Sorceress
A reclusive figure said to be the most powerful magi-
cian in Dolmenwood, Ygraine dwells in the many-tiered
Chateau Mauvesse, overlooking the black waters of the
Dark Mirror. It is rumoured that her explorations of other-
worldly realms have brought her into contact with the
Cold Prince and that she now works her magic to release
him from exile.

=== PAGE 11 ===
P a r t o n e | W e l c o m e t o D o l m e n W o o D
9
Dolmenwood Gazetteer
The most commonly traversed or spoken of regions of the Wood.The most commonly traversed or spoken of regions of the Wood.
Castle Brackenwold
The seat of the Duchy of Brackenwold and ancestral home
to the nobility of the line, Castle Brackenwold perches
upon a high hill with a city stretched at its feet. Alongside
the mighty ducal garrison is a great cathedral—the seat of
the Church’s power in Dolmenwood.
Dreg and Shantywood Isle
A port and fishing village beside the River Hameth. Dreg
has a seedy reputation as a haunt for thieves, gamblers,
and rascals of all stripes, only worsened by its proximity
to Shantywood Isle, a notorious port of ill-repute. Dreg is
also famed for its fine bog-swine sausages.
Fort Vulgar
A crude keep overlooking a port at the northern end of
Lake Longmere. Fort Vulgar is ruled by Sir Osric the Gaunt,
a vassal of the Duke of Brackenwold who is responsible for
the taxation of all traffic via the port.
Hag’s Addle
A shunned region of mazy swampland around the banks
of the River Hameth, haunted by the sinister Hag. It is said
that she glimpses into the past and future and resurrects
the dead, but the price she demands in return is perilous.
High-Hankle
The second largest town in Dolmenwood (after Castle
Brackenwold), High-Hankle is the ancient capital of the
High Wold region, now reputed for revelry, carousing, and
debauchery of every flavour. At its centre stands the impos-
ing Castle Perigonne, home of the Baron Hogwarsh.
The High Wold
A barony encompassing the south-western corner of
Dolmenwood, ruled in tandem by breggle and human
noble houses. The barony has become wild of late under the
lax rule of Baron Hogwarsh: highwaymen hunt the roads
and charlatans peddle questionable wares.
Lake Longmere
The great Lake Longmere, at the centre of Dolmenwood,
is twelve miles broad at its widest point. No ships ply its
waters, and locals speak fearfully of lake monsters.
Lankshorn
The market town of Lankshorn, ruled by the breggle aris-
tocracy, lies within a bowshot of the forest’s border. In
Lankshorn, the traditions of the civilised south meld with
the quaint, superstitious ways of Dolmenwood.
Mulchgrove
The central region of the Wood is a dank lowland riddled
with fungal forests, treacherous bogs, and twisted willow-
woods. The region is little traversed save by sentient fungal
monstrosities and the native mosslings, at home amongst
the dew-kissed fungi and moulds.
The Nagwood
The northern woods, corrupted by the presence of the
court of the wicked Nag-Lord and his foul armies. None
of sound mind venture within this twisted region of evil.
Prigwort
The market town of Prigwort is the largest settlement
beneath the forest’s eaves. Famed for its breweries and
distilleries, Prigwort is ruled by a council known as the
Brewmasters. Connoisseurs across the land covet the fine
spirits of Prigwort.
The Ruined Abbey of St Clewyd
East of Lake Longmere, in the depths of Dolmenwood, a
great monastery was founded of old. The abbey has lain
in ruins for a century following a nocturnal assault of
unknown provenance.
The Witching Ring
In the western reaches of Dolmenwood is found a vast ring
of frost-rimed stones, erected by the ancients for purpose
long forgotten. The folk of Dolmenwood name them the
“Summerstones” and the great ring which they inscribe
the “Witching Ring.”
The Woodcutters’ Encampment
Once a mere woodcutters’ camp, the village is now a thriv-
ing trade community. The locals practice unusual arts of
woodcraft and are said to show no fear of the Drune.
Dolmenwood Map
A map of Dolmenwood is found inside the book’s front
cover. This map depicts the Wood as described by local
folk, including the purported locations of certain sites
mentioned in legend and folklore.
The World of Fairy
The timeless world of Fairy—the native world of elves
and grimalkins, where magic permeates all things—lies
parallel to the mortal world. In Dolmenwood, the veil
between the two worlds is thin, and magical doorways
and roads allow fairies to slip into the mortal world.

=== PAGE 12 ===


=== PAGE 13 ===
Part Two
Starting Play
A
dventure! Yes, a fine thing for folks such as yourself,
with a spring in your step and a yearning to see the
world. But make sure you’re properly prepared and
have your saints in a row, as they say, before you step off the
path and into the wild. There’s all manner of weird beasties out
there you need to watch out for. Bogeys, redcaps, pooks, marsh
lanterns, slime-hulks, boggins, mogglewomps, cockatrices. The
list goes on and on, I’m afraid. I’ve got a proper reference you
might like over here... Oh and if you head back this way, be sure
to tell me all about anything you bumped into.
—Father Nedwynne Hargle, abbot of the Seminary of 100
Martyrs
“

=== PAGE 14 ===
12
P a r t t W o | S t a r t i n g P l a y
On Role-Playing Games
Introducing the noble art of adventure gaming.Introducing the noble art of adventure gaming.
A 
Role-Playing Game (RPG) is, at its core, a shared
on-going narrative exploring the adventures of
a group of imagined characters in an imagined
world.
When kids play cops and robbers, they’re role-playing. The
difference is that in an RPG such as Dolmenwood, the game
rules provide a framework that prevents the inevitable
“Bang, bang, I got you!” followed by “No you didn’t!” The
rules in this book provide structure, but pure role-playing
is simply imagining yourself as a character in a certain
situation and deciding what they would do.
Each player takes on the role of a single character in the
game, with one person acting as the Referee, describing the
world perceived by the others. The Referee also role-plays
other people and creatures the players encounter, from
humble shopkeepers to rampaging ogres.
BASIC PLAY EXAMPLE
Emily (playing Grendl Lockehorn, a breggle knight), James
(playing Samwise Lank, a human friar), and Jeff (playing
Boots Pouncemouse, a grimalkin enchanter) are exploring
the verdant oddities of Dolmenwood when they encounter
a lone goblin with a strange prize. Let’s listen in as Gavin,
the Referee, narrates the scene.
Gavin (Referee): You’ve been away from the village for
three days and are now deep in the wilderness. The trees
bend and twist, creating a net through which only the
occasional glimpse of starlight manages to reach down
and touch your eyes. The woods are gloomy by day, but
by night the darkness feels suffocating. The sounds of the
wilderness echo between the ancient trees and clawing
brush that surround the small clearing where you’ve made
camp. You’ve lit a small campfire for warmth. Do you want
to use the same order of watches through the night as you
used yesterday?
Emily (playing Grendl): Yep. Grendl is on first watch, Jeff
is on second watch. Samwise is on third watch.
Gavin: Great. You all settle down to sleep. It’s now the
middle of the night, so that’d be second watch. Jeff, what’s
Boots doing while he’s on watch.
Jeff (playing Boots): He’s reading through the little holy
book Samwise is always studying, giggling at how silly
human religion is—but he looks up every now and again in
a half-hearted effort that barely passes for being on guard.
James (playing Samwise): Hey! Put that back!
Jeff: You’re asleep. You weren’t using it. I’ll put it back before
you wake up.
Gavin: You’re laughing at a passage you find to be particu-
larly silly about St Thorm when you notice a second voice
joining your laughter. A piping, tittering laugh echoes
through the woods. It’s not loud enough to wake your
friends, but it’s clearly heard.
Jeff: I leap to my feet and throw the holy book at Samwise.
Wake him up and give him his book back all at once.
Gavin: Give me a ranged Attack Roll.
Jeff: <Rolls a 20-sided die> Umm, sorry James. <Looks to
Gavin> I rolled a 1.
James: You what?!
Gavin: The book slips from your grip and flies off into the
brush, but you hear a thud as it hits something other than
vegetation. You hear a new sound that wakes everyone up.
It’s the sound of a baby crying, wailing in fear. As Grendl
and Samwise come to, the three of you see a goblin with a
massive head and great googly, yellow eyes peering at you.
It clutches a swaddled newborn human child, no older than
a few days old, in its spindly arms.
Emily: I draw my sword and move forward.
New to Role-Playing Games?
This book explains the game rules in an easy-to-learn
way, including examples of how the rules work in
practice. For players with no prior experience of RPGs,
however, more direct experience can be useful to grasp
how the written rules and free-form narrative proce-
dure work together.
If you’ve never played an RPG before, by far the easiest
way to learn how they work is to simply dive in and play.
If you have friends who already play, just ask to join
them for a game or two. Failing that, it can be instruc-
tive to watch other people playing. There are many
live streams and YouTube channels online, including
recordings of groups exploring Dolmenwood.
Required Materials
All players need the following basic items to play
Dolmenwood. Players may share, but it is more conven-
ient for each player to have their own.
This book: The Dolmenwood Player’s Book.
Dice: A set of standard RPG dice, including 4-sided,
6-sided, 8-sided, 10-sided, 12-sided, and 20-sided dice.
Character sheet: A sheet to record character details.
This can be an official character sheet (downloaded
from dolmenwood.com) or a piece of blank paper.
Notebook: Pencils, blank paper, and gridded paper (or
equivalent software) for making notes and mapping.
Referee’s requirements: The person taking on the role
of the Referee also needs the Dolmenwood Campaign
Book and the Dolmenwood Monster Book.

=== PAGE 15 ===
P a r t t W o | S t a r t i n g P l a y
13
James: Wait! We can’t risk endangering the baby. Maybe
we can talk the goblin into giving it up.
Jeff: You want to negotiate with a goblin?
James: Yes. The kid is probably from the village. Remem-
ber that rumour about missing and cursed children we
heard? <To Gavin> Samwise takes a step towards the
goblin, slowly, and raises a hand before speaking: “Greet-
ings friend! Welcome to our humble camp site.”
Emily: Grendl doesn’t trust goblins after the incident at the
ruined farmstead a few sessions ago with the bag of hen’s
teeth and the spinning wheel. She is waiting for the first
sign of a threat to attack.
Jeff: Boots slowly rises to his feet, but I don’t draw a weapon
or anything. I give the goblin a casual wave and a quick
smile like he’s an old friend.
Gavin: Alright, the goblin clutches the child and seems
almost to lick his lips for a second as his eyes dart between
the three of you. “Can’t have my precious gift, not by steel
nor riddling shrift. Can’t have my sack, no won’t give it
back!”
Emily: Oh, he’s gonna get it…
Jeff: Boots casually remarks “Well, ya know stealing human
children is a tricky business. Gotta find the right market for
a seller. I hear harpies will trade ‘em for a song…”
James: Jeff!
Gavin (speaking as the goblin): “Child, child not for me.
Master, master’s property. I do as bid, no surprise, and
return to Master his secret prize. Though sprig of rosemary
is in my bag, neither it nor child is yours to be had.”
Jeff (as Boots): “Well, glad you’ve got that covered.” <Out
of character> Sorry guys. I got nothing.
Emily: If you guys don’t do something, I’m gonna risk
attacking him.
James: Rosemary, eh? I have an idea. “Rosemary you say?
I’m in need of some rosemary for my garden! Perhaps we
could trade.”
Gavin (as the goblin): “No trade with friar. Never trust a
holy liar.”
James (as Samwise): “Don’t you at least want to see what I
have? It could be shiny.”
Gavin: The goblin eyes you suspiciously.
Emily: He’s not buying it.
James: I pull out that gilded letter we got from the elf cour-
tier a few months back and wave it in front of the goblin,
trying to catch its edges in the firelight so it twinkles.
Emily: You kept that?
James: I keep everything.
Gavin: The goblin’s eyes catch on the letter and he nods
eagerly. “Yes, yes! Gold is best, best. You give Grimble-Grot
the letter and everything get better. If I like the trade, a deal
can be made.”
James: I slowly approach the goblin and hand him the
letter.
Gavin: He snatches it with one hand, clutching the wailing
child tighter in his free arm. He begins to read it. What’s
it say?
James: <Flips through his character sheet notes> “The one
who receives this letter is invited to palaver under a banner
of peace with its bearer until dawn under the promise of
an exchange to be made before sunrise as a sign of good
faith between Mortal and Fairy.”
Jeff: I get it! The goblin took the letter, now he’s under Oath
of Invitation and can’t cross us!
James: Bingo. Also because he took the letter, it means he
agreed to the trade.
Gavin: Clever!
Emily (as Grendl): “You have accepted the golden gilded
letter as a gift! We ask the child in exchange!”
Gavin (as the goblin): “Gifts must be named for gifts to be
claimed.”
James: You said it’s a newborn human child?
Gavin: Yeah.
James (as Samwise): “The child has no name. As an
ordained clergyman, I name her Rosemary! You offered
rosemary! By your name, Grimble-Grot, I hold you to your
word.”
Gavin: <Considers the impromptu trick and decides it
seems feasible enough to work—a fun and creative idea
from James> The goblin lets out a vexed hiss and shoves
the child roughly into Grendl’s free arm. “Cursed human,
so smart on two legs. Foul your beer, rot your eggs!” The
goblin scampers off into the woods. His voice echoes back,
“Master’s prize will bring you only sorrow. It shall come to
you tomorrow, tomorrow, and tomorrow.”
Jeff: Wow. I can’t believe that worked. Boots pipes up after
watching the whole exchange: “We’ve got some new prob-
lems, guys. In addition to bad beer and rotten eggs in the
near future, we’ve got a newborn baby and we’re three days
deep into the forest without a wet-nurse or fresh swad-
dling clothes, cursed by a goblin, and someone known as
‘Master’ is mad at us. Oh, and goblins never travel alone.”
Gavin: Boots is right. That’s when you hear the cackling of
goblins echo in the dark from all directions around your
camp…

=== PAGE 16 ===
14
P a r t t W o | S t a r t i n g P l a y
Terminology
A glossary of common terms used in the game.A glossary of common terms used in the game.
V
arious game terminology is used in Dolmenwood,
much of it in common with other role-playing
games and some unique to Dolmenwood. The
most frequently used terms are described here, along with
page references for further details.
GLOSSARY OF TERMS
Ability Check: A d6 roll modified by one of a character’s
Ability Scores, aiming to equal or beat 4. See Ability Checks,
p144.
Ability Modifier: A –3 to +3 modifier derived from one of
a character’s Ability Scores and applied to various rolls in
the game. See Ability Modifiers, p22.
Ability Scores: A character’s physical and mental apti-
tudes—Strength, Intelligence, Wisdom, Dexterity, Consti-
tution, and Charisma. Each Ability is rated from 3 to 18. See
Ability Scores, p22.
Adventure: A series of one or more game sessions during
which the party explores a specific location or engages
with a particular plot.
Adventurer: A person who embarks on dangerous quests
to acquire wealth and renown. All adventurers belong to a
Class, and all Player Characters are adventurers.
Alignment: A creature’s basic behaviour and moral
outlook: Lawful, Neutral, or Chaotic. See Alignment, p24.
Armour Class (AC): A creature’s ability to avoid damage in
combat. See Armour Class, p16.
Attack: A creature’s ability to hit foes in combat, rated as a
modifier applied to Attack Rolls. See Attack, p17.
Attack Roll: A d20 roll to determine whether an attack
succeeds, aiming to equal or beat an opponent’s Armour
Class. See Attack Rolls, p145.
Campaign: A series of adventures, usually involving a
consistent set of characters.
Character: A person in the imagined game world, whether
played by the Referee (NPCs) or a player (PCs). Some char-
acters are adventurers.
Class: A character’s adventuring profession (e.g. cleric,
fighter, magician, thief). See Part Four: Classes, p57.
Coin (weight): A measure of weight and bulk used for track-
ing encumbrance. See Encumbrance, p148.
cp: Copper pieces—a common type of coin. See Coinage,
p116.
Creature: Any character or monster.
Damage Roll: A die roll subtracted from a creature’s Hit
Point total when it suffers harm (often from an attack). See
Damage Rolls, p145.
Demi-fey: A creature born in the mortal world but whose
ancestors originated in the magical parallel world of Fairy.
See Mortals, Fairies, and Demi-Fey, p30.
Dungeon: An indoor, underground, or enclosed adven-
turing locale, for example a tomb, castle, or mine. See
Dungeons, p162.
Encounter: An encounter occurs when Player Characters
meet another group of creatures while adventuring. See
Encounters, p164.
Encumbrance: The load of gear carried by a character,
which may reduce their Speed. See Encumbrance, p148.
Experience Points (XP): Awarded by the Referee following
a successful adventure. When a character accumulates
a certain number of Experience Points, they increase in
Level. See Advancement, p25.
Fairy (type of creature): A creature that originates in the
magical parallel world of Fairy. See Mortals, Fairies, and
Demi-Fey, p30.
Fairy (world): The native world of fairies. A mysterious,
timeless parallel to the mortal world, infused with magic.
Magical doors connect Dolmenwood and Fairy.
Game time: The imagined time that passes in the game
world as the game is played.
gp: Gold pieces—a common type of coin. See Coinage, p116.
Hit Points (HP): A creature’s ability to avoid dying. Damage
reduces a creature’s Hit Point total. If reduced to 0, the
creature dies. See Hit Points, p16.
Initiative Roll: A d6 roll to determine which group acts
first in an encounter. See Initiative, p165.
Kindred: A type of intelligent creature that a player may
choose to play (e.g. human, elf, woodgrue). See Part Three:
Kindreds, p28.
Level (character): A character’s experience as an adven-
turer. Characters begin at Level 1 and advance through
successful adventuring. See Advancement, p25.
Level (creature): An indication of a creature’s power and
overall dangerousness, equivalent to a character’s Level.
Level (dungeon): The floor number of a dungeon, with the
first level being closest to the surface, and higher levels
being deeper underground.
Loyalty: A rating for a retainer’s loyalty to the employing
PC. See Retainers, p134.
Magic Resistance: A modifier applied to Saving Throws
against effects of magical origin. See Magic Resistance, p17.
Melee: Attacks with close-quarters weapons or natural
weaponry (e.g. swords, axes, claws, fists).
Missile: Attacks with thrown or fired weapons (e.g. arrows,
spears).
Monster: Any creature encountered during an adventure.
All monsters are played by the Referee.
Morale: A rating for a creature’s bravery and perseverance
in battle. See Morale, p167.
Mortal: A creature that originates in the mortal world. See
Mortals, Fairies, and Demi-Fey, p30.

=== PAGE 17 ===
P a r t t W o | S t a r t i n g P l a y
15
Mortal world: The everyday world of Dolmenwood, inhab-
ited by humans and other mortal Kindreds.
Non-Player Character (NPC): Characters encountered
during the game. All NPCs are played by the Referee.
Party: A group of adventurers.
Player: Participants in the game, each usually running a
single Player Character.
Player Character (PC): An individual player’s character in
the imagined world.
pp: Pellucidium pieces—an uncommon type of coin made
of fairy silver. See Coinage, p116.
Rank (spell): The level of complexity and power of a magic
spell. See Arcane Magic, p78 and Holy Magic, p100.
Reaction Roll: A 2d6 roll determining a creature’s reaction
when encountered. See Monster and NPC Reactions, p165.
Real time: The time that passes in the real world as the
game is played.
Referee: The person who leads game sessions for the other
players, designing adventures, arbitrating rules, and deter-
mining the reactions of people and creatures encountered.
Retainer: NPC adventurers hired to accompany Player
Characters on their adventures. See Retainers, p134.
Role-playing: The act of deciding a character’s actions and
speech by considering their point of view in the imagined
game world.
Round: A span of game time (roughly 10 seconds) used
during combat. See Time and Movement, p146.
Save Target: The target number for a Saving Throw, deter-
mined by a character’s Class and Level. See Save Targets,
p17.
Saving Throw: A d20 roll to determine whether a creature
avoids a detrimental effect, aiming to equal or beat the
appropriate Save Target. See Saving Throws, p145.
Session: Each time the players and Referee gather to play
the game is referred to as a session. Sessions typically last
around 2–6 hours.
Skill: A specific competency useful in adventuring. All
adventurers can use the Listen, Search, and Survival skills.
Some Classes grant additional skills.
Skill Check: A d6 roll testing a character’s proficiency with
a particular skill, aiming to equal or beat the appropriate
Skill Target. See Skill Checks, p144.
Skill Target: The target number for a Skill Check, deter-
mined by a character’s Kindred, Class, and Level.
sp: Silver pieces—a common type of coin. See Coinage,
p116.
Speed: The speed at which a creature can move when
exploring, travelling, or during combat. See Time and
Movement, p146.
Surprise Roll: A d6 roll to determine whether a group
of creatures is taken unawares by another group. See
Surprise, p164.
Target number: A number that a die roll must match or
exceed to succeed at a given task. Lower targets represent
easier tasks, higher targets represent harder tasks.
Turn: A span of game time (about 10 minutes) used during
dungeon exploration. See Time and Movement, p146.
Woldish: The common tongue spoken by most sentient
creatures in Dolmenwood. See Languages, p26.
Dice Rolling Notation
Similar to many other role-playing games, Dolmen-
wood uses polyhedral dice, each referred to by the
number of sides it has:
▶ d4: A four-sided die.
▶ d6: A normal six-sided die.
▶ d8: An eight-sided die.
▶ d10: A ten-sided die.
▶ d12: A twelve-sided die.
▶ d20: A twenty-sided die.
Multi-Dice Rolls
In situations where multiple dice should be rolled and
the results summed, the number of dice is noted before
the “d.” For example, 3d6 indicates that three six-sided
dice should be rolled and the results added together.
Modifiers
Modifiers to the roll are applied after the results of all
dice have been summed. For example, 3d6+2 indicates
that three six-sided dice should be rolled, the results
added together, then 2 added on top.
“Natural” Results
The rules occasionally refer to the “natural” result of
rolling dice (e.g. “a natural 20”). This means the number
rolled on the die, before any modifiers are applied.
d2 and d3
Two-sided or three-sided dice can be mimicked using a
d6. For a d2, a roll of 1–3 indicates ‘one’ and 4–6 indicates
‘two’. For a d3, a roll of 1–2 indicates ‘one’, 3–4 indicates
‘two’, and 5–6 indicates ‘three’.
d100 / d%
A hundred-sided die (sometimes called a percentile
die) requires rolling two d10s: the first treated as “tens”
and the second treated as “ones.” For example, a roll of
2 and 3 would make 23. If two 0s are rolled, the result
counts as 100.
Chance Rolls
Some rules specify a chance of success, either as a
percentage (e.g. 35%) or using an X-in-Y notation (e.g.
2-in-6). This indicates that the appropriate die type
should be rolled (i.e. a d100 for a percentage chance, a
d6 for an X-in-6 chance, etc.) and the result compared
against the specified chance. If the roll is within the
specified range of success, the check succeeds.
Probability Curves
It is important to note that multi-dice rolls produce a
bell curve, where middle value results are more likely.
For example, when rolling 3d6, there is a 12.5% chance
of rolling a 10, and only a 0.46% chance of rolling a 3.
The rules sometimes make use of this behaviour in
situations where certain results are far more likely, for
example when rolling Ability Scores (p22).

=== PAGE 18 ===
16
P a r t t W o | S t a r t i n g P l a y
Character Statistics
The basic game statistics that describe an adventurer.The basic game statistics that describe an adventurer.
P
layer Characters are described by a set of statistics
defining their capabilities, strengths, and weak-
nesses in the game world.
Ability Scores
The ratings of an adventurer’s defining physical and
mental attributes. There are 6 Abilities: Strength, Intel-
ligence, Wisdom, Dexterity, Constitution, and Charisma.
See Ability Scores, p22. Ability Scores are recorded as
numbers between 3–18, with 3 being the worst score possi-
ble and 18 the best.
Kindred
A character may be human or one of a number of types of
fantastic intelligent creatures that live in Dolmenwood.
Each Kindred has a number of special traits, from fairy
magic to bonuses in combat. The Kindreds players may
choose from are: breggle, elf, grimalkin, human, mossling,
woodgrue. See Part Three: Kindreds, p28.
Size: A character’s Kindred determines their size: either
human-sized (Medium) or smaller than human-sized
(Small).
Creature type: A character’s Kindred determines their
creature type as demi-fey, fairy, or mortal.
Native languages: A character’s Kindred determines their
native languages.
Class
A character’s role or profession as an adventurer. Each
Class has a number of special traits, from combat talents
to spell-casting. The Classes players may choose from are:
bard, cleric, enchanter, fighter, friar, hunter, knight, magi-
cian, thief. See Part Four: Classes, p57.
Weapons and armour: A character’s Class determines
which kinds of weapons and armour they can use.
Level
A character’s expertise as an adventurer is denoted by their
Level. Characters typically start play at Level 1 (the lowest
Level of adventurer) and can increase in Level through
successful adventuring. As a character goes up in Level,
they gain more powerful capabilities, as defined by their
Class. This book contains rules for characters up to Level 15.
Experience Points (XP)
A character’s advancement in the game is tracked by the
accumulation of experience points. Experience Points
are awarded by the Referee after a successful adventure.
When a character has accumulated a certain number of
Experience Points, their Level increases. Each Class speci-
fies the number of Experience Points required to achieve
each Level.
Prime Abilities
The Ability (or Abilities) most important to a character’s
Class. A character with high scores in their Prime Abilities
may gain a bonus to Experience Points awarded by the
Referee. Conversely, a character with a low score in a Prime
Ability may suffer a penalty to awarded Experience Points.
See Prime Abilities, p22.
Hit Points (HP)
A character’s ability to avoid dying. A character has a maxi-
mum Hit Point total and a current Hit Point total, which
are tracked separately.
Rolling Hit Points: A character’s Hit Points are rolled with
a die type determined by their Class (for example, fighters
roll 1d8 and magicians roll 1d4). When play begins, current
Hit Points and maximum Hit Points have the same value.
Damage: When a character is harmed, their current Hit
Point total is reduced. If this number reaches 0, the char-
acter dies. See p145.
Healing: Rest or healing can restore lost Hit Points up to
the character’s maximum Hit Points. See p160.
Gaining Levels: When a character gains a Level, a die is
rolled and the result added to their maximum Hit Points.
The type of die rolled is determined by the character’s
Class. As Hit Points increase, characters are able to combat
more dangerous foes and face greater adversity.
Armour Class (AC)
A character’s ability to avoid damage in combat. Armour
Class is determined by the character’s armour and their
Dexterity score.
Default Armour Class: An unarmoured character with
average Dexterity has AC 10.
Combat Aptitude
A character’s aptitude in combat is classified as martial,
semi-martial, or non-martial, determined by their Class.
For example, fighter is a martial Class and magician a
non-martial Class. Combat Aptitude determines how
quickly a character’s Attack and Save Targets advance.

=== PAGE 19 ===
P a r t t W o | S t a r t i n g P l a y
17
Attack
A character’s ability to hit foes in combat, determined by
their Class and Level. A character’s Attack is a bonus added
to Attack Rolls. See Attack Rolls, p145.
Gaining Levels: As characters advance in Level, their
Attack gets higher, increasing their chance of hitting oppo-
nents in combat.
Save Targets
A character’s ability to avoid certain dangerous or detri-
mental effects, determined by their Class and Level. Save
Targets are the numbers to match or exceed for a success-
ful Saving Throw. There are five Saving Throw categories,
each representing a common type of effect: Doom, Ray,
Hold, Blast, Spell. See Saving Throws, p145.
Gaining Levels: As characters advance in Level, their Save
Targets get lower, improving their chance of avoiding
detrimental effects.
Magic Resistance
A modifier applied to Saving Throws against effects of
magical origin, determined by a character’s Wisdom and
Kindred. This may include saves against magical effects
in any Saving Throw category, though does not normally
apply to saves against breath attacks, such as wyrm breath.
Speed
The speed at which a character can move when exploring,
travelling, or during combat. See Time and Movement,
p146.
Default Speed: The default Speed for characters is 40. This
may be adjusted by the amount of gear and treasure a char-
acter is carrying. See Encumbrance, p148.
Skills
Skills represent specific competencies useful in adventur-
ing. As professional adventurers, all characters have basic
competence with certain common activities—listening,
searching, and wilderness survival. Some Classes grant the
use of additional, specialised skills. See Skill Checks, p144.
Alignment
Characters (and all other creatures) are classified as Lawful,
Neutral, or Chaotic. Alignment determines how certain
magic influences a character and should be used by the
player as a guideline for role-playing. See Alignment, p24.
Background
A secondary profession or skill set gained due to a charac-
ter’s upbringing or life prior to becoming a professional
adventurer. Backgrounds play no mechanical role in the
game rules, but the Referee may use them as an aid to judg-
ing which actions a character can perform. See Is a Roll
Warranted?, p139 and Narrative Interaction, p150.
Monster Statistics
While this book does not contain a full bestiary, game
statistics for a small number of monsters and animals
are present (e.g. for mounts which can be purchased or
creatures that can be summoned by magic). Monsters,
animals, and NPCs are described with a simplified set
of statistics listing the main stats required for combat.
Monster statistics are mostly the same as those used for
characters, but the following points are worth noting.
Size: Human-sized (Medium), smaller than human-
sized (Small), or larger than human-sized (Large).
Type: Animal, bug, construct, demi-fey, dragon, fairy,
fungus, monstrosity, mortal, ooze, plant, or undead.
Intelligence: Mindless, Animal Intelligence, Semi-In-
telligent, Sentient, or Genius.
HP: The dice rolled to determine a monster’s Hit Points,
with the average value noted in parentheses.
Saves: The monster’s Save Targets, listed using the
following initials: D(oom), R(ay), H(old), B(last), S(pell).
Att: The attacks the monster can make each Round,
with the Attack bonus and damage in parentheses.
Morale: The monster’s courage, ferocity, and persis-
tence in battle. See Morale, p167.
XP: The XP award for defeating the monster.
Example: Prigwort Prancer
large animal—animal intelligence—neutral
Level 2 AC 12 HP 2d8 (9) Saves D12 R13 H14 B15 S16
Att 2 hooves (+1, 1d4) Speed 80 Morale 7 XP 20

=== PAGE 20 ===
18
P a r t t W o | S t a r t i n g P l a y
Creating a Character
How to create a novice adventurer, ready to brave the befuddling Dolmenwood.How to create a novice adventurer, ready to brave the befuddling Dolmenwood.
W
hen creating a character, you need a character
sheet—pictured to the right. The Dolmenwood
character sheet is available online at dolmen-
wood.com as a PDF to download and print.
A note on randomness: Many character statistics are
determined by rolling dice. You are encouraged to savour
the fun, unexpected character concepts that emerge from
interpreting these random results. The character creation
example (p20) demonstrates this.
1. ROLL ABILITY SCORES
Roll 3d6 for each of your character’s Ability Scores in turn:
Strength, Intelligence, Wisdom, Dexterity, Constitution,
and Charisma. See Ability Scores, p22.
Sub-Par Characters (Optional Rule)
If you roll a character with an 8 or less in every Ability Score
or a 6 or lower in more than one Ability Score, you may
choose to discard the character and start again.
2. CHOOSE A KINDRED
Select one of the Kindreds in Part Three: Kindreds, p28.
New players: The human Kindred is recommended, as it
has the least special traits.
Class restrictions: Elves, grimalkins, and woodgrues
cannot be clerics or friars as they have no spiritual connec-
tion with the deities of mortals.
3. CHOOSE A CLASS
Select one of the Classes in Part Four: Classes, p57,
bearing in mind the Prime Abilities of each Class (see the
Summary of Classes table).
New players: The fighter Class is recommended, as it has
the least special traits.
4. ADJUST ABILITY SCORES
If you wish, you may raise your character’s Prime Abilities
by lowering other (non-Prime) Ability Scores. For every 2
points by which an Ability Score is lowered, 1 point may be
added to a Prime Ability. No Ability Score may be lowered
below 9, and no Prime Ability may be raised above 13 by
adjustment.
5. NOTE ABILITY MODIFIERS
Now that your character’s Ability Scores have been deter-
mined, make a note of any associated bonuses or penalties.
See Ability Scores, p22.
6. NOTE KINDRED AND
CLASS TRAITS
Record any special traits possessed by your character as a
result of their Kindred and Class, including the following.
Attack: The advancement table for your character’s Class
lists your Attack. This value indicates your character’s
chance of hitting opponents in combat.
Save Targets: The advancement table for your character’s
Class lists your Save Targets. These are the target numbers
used when making Saving Throws to avoid different kinds
of dangerous or detrimental effects.
Skill Targets: Note your character’s target numbers for
Listen, Search, and Survival Skill Checks. All skills default
to a target number of 6, unless your character’s Kindred or
Class specifies a lower target number.
Languages: Your character’s native languages are listed in
the Kindred description. This always includes the Wold-
ish tongue spoken by all folk in Dolmenwood. Characters
with high Intelligence (see Ability Scores, p22) may also
choose additional languages from the list on p26.

=== PAGE 21 ===
P a r t t W o | S t a r t i n g P l a y
19
SUMMARY OF CLASSES
Class Prime Abilities 
Hit
Points
Combat
Aptitude 
Main Class Capabilities
Bard Charisma and Dexterity 1d6 Semi-martial Counter charm, enchantment, decipher script, folklore
Cleric Wisdom 1d6 Semi-martial Holy magic (from Level 2), holy order, turn undead
Enchanter Charisma and Intelligence 1d6 Semi-martial Glamours, fairy runes, detect magic, use arcane items
Fighter Strength 1d8 Martial Combat talents
Friar Intelligence and Wisdom 1d4 Non-martial Herbalism, holy magic (from Level 1), turn undead
Hunter Constitution and Dexterity 1d8 Martial Animal companion, alertness, tracking, missile attacks
Knight Charisma and Strength 1d8 Martial Horsemanship, monster slayer, strength of will
Magician Intelligence 1d4 Non-martial Arcane magic, detect magic
Thief Dexterity 1d4 Semi-martial Back-stab, climb, decipher script, disarm traps, pick locks
7. ROLL HIT POINTS
Determine your character’s Hit Points by rolling the die
for the chosen Class and adding the Constitution Modifier
(see Ability Scores, p22).
Minimum 1 HP: Your character always starts with at least
1 Hit Point, regardless of Constitution Modifier.
Re-Rolling 1s and 2s (Optional Rule)
If your roll for Hit Points comes up 1 or 2 (before applying
the Constitution Modifier), the Referee may allow you to
re-roll HP.
8. ROLL EQUIPMENT
Your character’s starting equipment is determined by a few
die rolls. Characters start play with the following.
General items: Common clothes. A backpack containing
2 preserved rations, a waterskin, and a tinder box. A belt
pouch containing 3d6 gold pieces.
Class items: Weapons, armour, and special items as noted
in your character’s Class.
Adventuring items: Choose or roll up to 4 items from the
Adventuring Items table.
Trinket: An odd, possibly slightly magical item, rolled on
the trinkets table for your character’s Kindred.
Buying Equipment (Optional Rule)
If you prefer to customise your character’s equipment, you
may roll for gold (3d6 × 10gp) and purchase armour, weap-
ons, and equipment as desired. See Part Six: Equipment,
Services, and Animals, p115.
9. NOTE ARMOUR CLASS
Your character’s Armour Class is determined by their
armour (see Armour and Weapons, p118) plus their
Dexterity Modifier (see Ability Scores, p22). Some
Kindreds and Classes also grant a bonus to AC.
Unarmoured AC: If your character has no armour, their
AC is 10 plus their Dexterity Modifier.
10. NOTE SPEED
Determine your character’s Speed based on the amount of
equipment carried (see Encumbrance, p148).
Unencumbered Speed: Unencumbered characters have
Speed 40, an exploration rate of 120′ per Turn, and 8 Travel
Points per day when travelling overland (see Travel,
p156).
11. CHOOSE ALIGNMENT
Decide whether your character is Lawful, Neutral, or
Chaotic (see Alignment, p24) and note this on your
character sheet.
Class restrictions: Clerics and friars may not be Chaotic.
12. NOTE LEVEL AND XP
Your character begins play at Level 1 with 0 XP.
13. NAME AND DETAILS
Referring to the tables listed under your character’s
Kindred, choose a name for your character. Optionally,
select a background and any extra details. You are now
ready for adventure.
ADVENTURING ITEMS
d20 Item d20 Item d20 Item d20 Item
1 Bedroll 6 Firewood (bundle) 11 Marbles (bag of 20) 16 Sledgehammer
2 Chalk (10 sticks) 7 Grappling hook 12 Oil flask 17 Small hammer
3 Chisel 8 Ink, quill, 5 sheets paper 13 Rope (50′) 18 Tent
4 Cooking pots 9 Iron spikes (12) 14 Sack 19 Torches (3)
5 Crowbar 10 Lantern (hooded) 15 Shovel 20 Twine (100′ ball)

=== PAGE 22 ===
20
P a r t t W o | S t a r t i n g P l a y
Example of
Creating a Character
An adventurer emerges from a player’s choices and interpretation of die rolls.An adventurer emerges from a player’s choices and interpretation of die rolls.
1. ROLL ABILITY SCORES
The player rolls 3d6 for each Ability Score in turn:
Strength: 9. An average score.
Intelligence: 8. Slightly below average.
Wisdom: 15. A very good score.
Dexterity: 6. A rather poor score.
Constitution: 16. A lucky roll—an excellent score.
Charisma: 11. An average score.
A picture of the character is already forming. Their high
Constitution and Wisdom suggest a hardy character with a
strong connection with the spiritual. Their poor Dexterity
and below average Intelligence suggest a rustic character
with little interest in intellectual or artistic pursuits.
2. CHOOSE A KINDRED
Kindred is selected based on player preference, although
the Referee may sometimes wish to limit available options.
For example, some Referees prefer to restrict Player Char-
acters to mortal Kindreds, or even to humans only.
The picture formed by the rolled Ability Scores brings
an elderly breggle to the player’s mind—still hale (high
Constitution) but somewhat doddery with age (low Dexter-
ity). The Referee approves this choice.
3. CHOOSE A CLASS
Class is selected based on player preference and Prime
Abilities. While Classes do not have any Ability Score
requirements, an especially good roll in an Ability indi-
cates suitability for any Class with that Prime Ability.
Looking at the rolled Ability Scores once more, the player
focuses on the high Wisdom—an indicator of spiritual
insight. The player envisages a mild-mannered individual,
with a strong personal connection to the divine.
Cleric and friar both use Wisdom as a Prime Ability. The
player selects friar—a better fit with their conception of
the character.
4. ADJUST ABILITY SCORES
The player has the option of lowering non-Prime Ability
Scores in order to raise Prime Abilities, on a two-for-one
exchange. As Wisdom and Intelligence are the character’s
Prime Abilities (as a friar), they may only lower Strength,
Dexterity, Constitution, or Charisma.
Raising the character’s Prime Abilities can be beneficial
either to gain a bonus to earned Experience Points (if all
Prime Abilities are 13 or higher) or for the other bonuses
associated with the Ability Scores (e.g. higher Wisdom
grants a bonus to resist magical effects).
Noting that one of the character’s Prime Abilities is below
9 (which would incur an Experience Point penalty), the
player considers making an adjustment. Wishing to keep
the high Constitution score, the only option is to lower
Charisma. Subtracting 2 points from Charisma, the player
raises the character’s Intelligence by 1, resulting in the
following Ability Scores: Strength 9, Intelligence 9, Wisdom
15, Dexterity 6, Constitution 16, Charisma 9.
5. NOTE ABILITY MODIFIERS
Now that the character’s Ability Scores are established,
the player consults the Ability Modifiers table (p22)
and records all relevant modifiers on the character sheet,
as follows:
Strength: 9. Average; no Modifier.
Intelligence: 9. Average; no Modifier.
Wisdom: 15. +1 Modifier.
Dexterity: 6. –1 Modifier.
Constitution: 16. +2 Modifier.
Charisma: 9. Average; no Modifier.

=== PAGE 23 ===
P a r t t W o | S t a r t i n g P l a y
21
6. NOTE KINDRED AND
CLASS TRAITS
Reading over the breggle and friar descriptions once more,
the player makes notes on their special traits. Breggles
have a natural horn attack and fur that grants an AC bonus.
Friars have an increased chance of success with Survival
when foraging, gain an AC bonus, may attack with culinary
implements, gain a bonus when using medicinal herbs,
cast holy spells (a single Rank 1 spell for a Level 1 friar), and
can attempt to turn the undead.
Attack: The player consults the friar advancement table
and notes the character’s Attack: +0 for a Level 1 friar. This
bonus is applied when making Attack Rolls, in addition to
any modifiers due to Strength or Dexterity.
Save Targets: Consulting the friar advancement table
again, the player notes the character’s Save Targets: Doom
11, Ray 12, Hold 13, Blast 16, Spell 14. They also note that the
character’s Wisdom Modifier (+1) grants them +1 Magic
Resistance.
Skill Targets: Friars do not have any specialised skills,
but they do have a lower Skill Target with Survival when
foraging.
Languages: The character knows all languages listed in the
breggle Kindred description: Woldish, Gaffe, and Caprice.
Friars also gain a bonus language: Liturgic (the Church
scriptural tongue). As the character has average Intelli-
gence (9), they do not gain additional languages.
7. ROLL HIT POINTS
Level 1 friars have 1d4 Hit Points. The player rolls a 3. Adding
the Constitution Modifier, the character starts with 5 Hit
Points.
8. ROLL EQUIPMENT
The player rolls a few dice to determine the character’s
starting equipment. General items: Common clothing, a
backpack, 2 preserved rations, a waterskin, a tinder box, a
belt pouch, and 10 gold pieces. Friar class items: A dagger,
a friar’s habit, and a wooden holy symbol. Adventuring
items: A shovel and a lantern (randomly rolled), plus 2 oil
flasks (selected from the list). Breggle trinket: A gnarled
root shaped like a mossling.
Mulling over the randomly determined items, the player
imagines the friar as a keen forager (hence the shovel) who
has recently unearthed a curious specimen that they now
seek sagacious advice on (the mossling-shaped root).
9. NOTE ARMOUR CLASS
Since friars cannot wear armour of any kind, the char-
acter’s base AC is 10. This is reduced to 9 by the charac-
ter’s low Dexterity (–1 Modifier), increased to 10 by the
character’s thick breggle fur, and finally increased to 12
by the friar’s Armour of Faith trait. Overall, the character
is poorly defended and would be wise to avoid combat
where possible.
10. NOTE SPEED
The Referee informs the player that the slot encumbrance
rules are in use (see Encumbrance, p148). Carrying 3
equipped items—a dagger, a lantern, and a belt pouch with
10gp and the gnarled root—the character has a base Speed
of 40. The character’s backpack with 8 stowed items does
not further reduce their Speed.
The player notes Speed 40 on the character sheet.
11. CHOOSE ALIGNMENT
The player considers which of the three alignments
(Lawful, Neutral, and Chaotic) best suit the character.
They decide on Lawful, due to the character’s benevolent,
well-meaning demeanour.
12. NOTE LEVEL AND XP
The character is Level 1 and has 0 XP as they begin their
adventuring career.
13. NAME AND DETAILS
Name: Looking at the breggle names table, the player
decides that the character is female and rolls the name
Crewwin Wolder.
Background: A roll on the breggle background table comes
up with magician’s assistant. An unusual result, consider-
ing the character’s low Intelligence and devout calling. The
player considers discarding the result and re-rolling but
then hits upon the idea of Crewwin having been a reluctant
magician’s apprentice in her youth. She was eventually
cast out for sanctimoniously refusing to cooperate with
her erstwhile master’s nefarious schemes.
Other details: Rolling on the other breggle detail tables,
the following results emerge: Crewwin’s ears are pierced
with nails (perhaps a form of religious penance), she has
missing teeth (due to age), her fur is grey and greasy (due to
a life on the road), her voice is throaty, she is a wild hedonist
(the player decides to re-roll this ill-fitting result and gets
“ale-addled”—a more likely proposition for a friar), she
wears a grimy apron (to protect her habit from mud when
digging for roots), she desires to escape justice for a past
crime (perhaps her former master still seeks to apprehend
her), and believes that the end of the world is nigh (perhaps
due to prophetic dreams).
Crewwin Wolder is now ready for adventure!

=== PAGE 24 ===
22
P a r t t W o | S t a r t i n g P l a y
Ability Scores
A character’s basic aptitudes, and how they are used in the game.A character’s basic aptitudes, and how they are used in the game.
C
haracters are rated in six Abilities, representing
their physical and mental aptitudes. A character’s
rating in each Ability determines whether they
have any bonuses or penalties associated with various
actions in the game.
ABILITY MODIFIERS
High or low Ability Scores may grant a bonus or penalty
associated with other rolls in the game. The Ability Modi-
fiers table lists the Modifier associated with different Abil-
ity Scores. The effects of each Ability Score’s Modifier are
described on the next page.
ABILITY MODIFIERS
Ability Score Modifier
3 –3
4–5 –2
6–8 –1
9–12 None
13–15 +1
16–17 +2
18 +3
ABILITY CHECKS
The rules sometimes call for an Ability Check (see p144),
where a character’s basic physical or mental aptitudes are
tested. The situations in which each Ability Score may be
tested are listed on the next page.
PRIME ABILITIES
Each Class has one or more Prime Abilities of special
importance to its function. For example, fighters rely on
Strength and magicians rely on Intelligence.
XP modifier: A character’s score in their Prime Ability
determines a modifier applied to all Experience Points
earned, as shown in the Prime Ability XP Modifiers table.
Multiple Prime Abilities: For Classes with multiple Prime
Abilities, the lowest score determines a character’s XP
modifier. For example, a bard with 8 Dexterity and 15
Charisma would suffer a –10% penalty to XP.
PRIME ABILITY XP MODIFIERS
Prime Ability Score XP Modifier
3–5 –20%
6–8 –10%
13–15 +5%
16–18 +10%

=== PAGE 25 ===
P a r t t W o | S t a r t i n g P l a y
23
STRENGTH
Brawn, muscle power, and physical might.
Melee: The Strength Modifier is applied to Attack and
Damage Rolls with melee weapons.
Strength Checks: Breaking down doors (p151), forc-
ing open doors (p151), jumping (p153), swimming in
armour (p154).
INTELLIGENCE
Learning, memory, and reasoning.
Languages spoken: A positive Intelligence Modifier equals
the number of additional languages the character speaks.
These should be chosen by the player during character
creation—see Languages, p26. A negative Intelligence
Modifier has no effect on the number of languages a char-
acter speaks.
Literacy: Characters with Intelligence below 6 optionally
can only read and write basic words and phrases.
Intelligence Checks: Learning a spell from a spell book
(p78), smoking and contemplating a problem (p129).
WISDOM
Insight, common sense, and intuition.
Magic Resistance: The Wisdom Modifier determines
the character’s Magic Resistance (see Magic Resistance,
p17), used when rolling Saving Throws against effects
of magical origin.
Wisdom Checks: Campfire cooking (p158).
DEXTERITY
Agility, reflexes, quickness, and balance.
Armour Class: The Dexterity Modifier is applied to the
character’s Armour Class.
Missile attacks: The Dexterity Modifier is applied to Attack
Rolls (but not Damage Rolls) with missile weapons.
Dexterity Checks: Climbing in tense or difficult circum-
stances (p150).
CONSTITUTION
Health, stamina, and endurance.
Hit Points: The Constitution Modifier is added to the char-
acter’s Hit Points at Level 1 and every time a level is gained
thereafter up to Level 10. A character always gains at least
1 Hit Point per Level, regardless of Constitution Modifier.
Constitution Checks: Getting a good night’s rest when
camping wild (p159), resisting the effects of alcohol
(p127).
CHARISMA
Leadership potential, personal magnetism, and physical
appearance.
Retainers: The Charisma Modifier is applied to the maxi-
mum number of retainers the character may employ at one
time as well as their Loyalty score. See Retainers, p134.
First impressions: Charisma affects the reaction of poten-
tial retainers during hiring (see Retainers, p134) and the
reaction of NPCs and monsters when first encountered (see
Encounters, p164).
Charisma Checks: Entertaining around the campfire
(p158), hunters establishing a connection with an animal
companion (p68).

=== PAGE 26 ===
24
P a r t t W o | S t a r t i n g P l a y
Alignment
The three fundamental modes of behaviour that drive all creatures.The three fundamental modes of behaviour that drive all creatures.
A
lignments are cosmic principles that represent
broad world views and modes of behaviour. All
beings are categorised under one of three align-
ments: Lawful, Neutral, or Chaotic.
LAWFUL
Lawful beings are trustworthy, believe in protecting
others, and act for the good of the group. They obey the
rules of society and strive for fairness and justice.
On a philosophical level, Law represents the belief in good-
ness, order, truth, and justice as the natural order of the
universe.
NEUTRAL
Neutral beings cooperate with others as long as it is not to
their own detriment. They treat others as they are them-
selves treated and believe in self-reliance. Beings of less
than human intelligence that act purely on instinct (e.g.
normal animals) are classified as Neutral.
On a philosophical level, Neutrality represents the belief
in a balance between the forces of Law and Chaos, with
neither side dominant.
CHAOTIC
Chaotic beings lie and use others to expedite their own
ends, with no concern for the good of the group. They casu-
ally break laws and violate norms, driven by the belief that
the rules are as arbitrary as their own whims.
On a philosophical level, Chaos represents a belief in
the meaninglessness and randomness of the universe,
wherein the individual’s selfish desires are utmost. This
principle can usually be equated with evil.
REVEALING ALIGNMENT
Players must inform the Referee of their characters’ Align-
ment, but they do not have to tell other players.
ROLE-PLAYING ALIGNMENT
Players should consider their character’s Alignment when
determining their actions. The Referee may call the player’s
attention to deeds that contradict the chosen Alignment.
If a character repeatedly behaves in a manner contrary to
their Alignment, the Referee may suggest that they change
to an Alignment better fitting to their behaviour.
ALIGNMENT AND MAGIC
In addition to its role as a broad guide to character behav-
iour, Alignment influences the way some magic affects
characters. Some spells only affect creatures of certain
Alignment (for example, the holy spell Mantle of Protec-
tion). Likewise, some magic items have special properties
related to Alignment.

=== PAGE 27 ===
P a r t t W o | S t a r t i n g P l a y
25
Advancement
How adventurers gain experience and grow in power.How adventurers gain experience and grow in power.
A
dventurers begin play at Level 1 with no Expe-
rience Points. Those who have success in
adventuring gain Experience Points, gradually
accumulating enough to increase in Level.
PARTY XP AWARDS
A party that survives an adventure and returns to safety
gains Experience Points (XP). XP is awarded by the Referee,
based on how successful the adventure was. The main
factors are as follows. The Dolmenwood Campaign Book
has full details on awarding XP, including optional rules
for additional kinds of XP awards.
Treasure: The party gains 1 XP per 1 gold piece value of
treasure recovered. Recovered treasure is the primary
source of XP, usually accounting for three-quarters or
more of total XP earned.
Foes defeated: The party gains XP for every foe defeated
(i.e. slain, outsmarted, captured, scared away, etc.). The
XP award for a creature is determined by its Level and the
number of potent special traits it has.
DIVIDING PARTY XP
All XP awarded to the party is totalled and divided evenly
between all party members who survived the adventure.
Awarded XP is always divided evenly, irrespective of how
the party decides to divide treasure.
Prime Ability XP Modifiers
Characters with especially low or high scores in their
Class’s Prime Abilities receive a bonus or penalty applied
to XP awarded to them (see Prime Abilities, p22).
Retainers
Retainers (see p134) are treated somewhat differently
than Player Characters.
Townsfolk retainers: Do not gain XP, so are not counted as
party members for the purposes of XP division.
Adventurer retainers: Adventurer retainers are counted
as party members for the purposes of XP division. As
retainers follow instructions from PCs, rather than inde-
pendently making decisions, all XP they earn is halved.
Example: A party of four PCs, three adventurer retainers, and
two townsfolk retainers is awarded a total of 7,000 XP. This
total is divided by 7 (4 PCs + 3 retainers—not counting the
townsfolk), resulting in an award of 1,000 XP per character.
The PCs gain 1,000 XP each and the retainers gain 500 XP each.
MAXIMUM XP PER SESSION
A character cannot advance more than one Level in a single
session. Any additional XP that would take a character two
or more Levels above their current Level are lost, leaving
the character at 1 XP below the total for the next Level.
LEVELLING UP
When a character gains enough XP to reach the next Level
(found on the advancement table for each Class), update
the character sheet with improvements.
1. Hit Points: Increase the character’s current and maxi-
mum Hit Points by the amount listed.
2. Attack and Save Targets: Note any improvements to
Attack and Save Targets listed.
3. Spells and skills: Note any change in Skill Targets and
the number of spells the character can use each day, as
applicable to the Class.
4. Other Kindred or Class traits: Note any additional traits
that the character is able to use due to their increased
Level. (Some Kindred and Class traits can only be used
by characters of a certain Level.)
5. XP for next Level: Note the XP total required for the
next Level.
Example: Sedgewick the magician is Level 3 with 9,400 XP,
just short of the 10,000 needed to reach Level 4. Following
a particularly successful adventure, he gains an additional
5,000 XP. This brings his XP total to 14,400—enough to reach
Level 4. The player consults the magician Class description
to see what benefits Sedgewick gains. Firstly, he gains 1d4 Hit
Points (the player rolls a 2 and adds this to Sedgewick’s HP
total). Secondly, the player notes improved Attack and Save
Targets. Thirdly, the player notes the ability to memorise one
additional Rank 2 spell per day. Sedgewick requires a total of
20,000 XP to reach Level 5.
TRAINING (OPTIONAL RULE)
The Referee may require characters to engage in a period of
training in order to level up. Until the training is complete,
the character cannot advance to the next Level and can
gain no further XP.
Training with a mentor: A character may train under
a mentor of the same Class and higher Level. Training
requires 1–4 weeks. The Referee may determine the train-
ing time randomly (1d4) or may base it on the player’s
performance (e.g. clever play, successful use of Class capa-
bilities, etc.). Training under a mentor costs 250gp per week
per Level of the trainee.
Training alone: If the character trains alone, the cost is
halved but the time required is doubled.

=== PAGE 28 ===
26
P a r t t W o | S t a r t i n g P l a y
Languages
The tongues and cants of the sentient folk of Dolmenwood.The tongues and cants of the sentient folk of Dolmenwood.
A 
multitude of languages, dialects, and cants are
spoken within Dolmenwood, from the common
tongues of mortal folk to the otherworldly into-
nations of Fairy. Many of these languages can be learned
by Player Characters (see Player Character Languages),
while others are the sole province of ancient fairies and
learned sages.
THE COMMON TONGUE
Woldish
The language spoken by virtually all sentient creatures in
Dolmenwood. Woldish is a dialect of the common tongue
that is spoken in the wider world beyond the Wood.
Old Woldish
The language of the folk who entered Dolmenwood and
founded the Kingdom (now Duchy) of Brackenwold.
Learning: Although Old Woldish is no longer spoken, its
study is common among the well-educated.
Player Character Languages
A Player Character’s native languages are determined
by their Kindred. All characters speak Woldish, and
some Kindreds speak other mortal or fairy languages.
High Intelligence: Characters with a high Intelligence
(see Ability Scores, p22) may roll or select additional
languages from the list below.
COMMON LANGUAGES
d6 Language Notes
1 Caprice Breggle noble tongue
2–3 Gaffe Breggle common tongue
4 Liturgic Pluritine Church scriptural tongue
5 Old Woldish Ancient language
6 Sylvan Demi-fey common tongue
Obscure languages: At the Referee’s discretion, characters
may learn the following more obscure languages some-
times spoken in Dolmenwood: Boggin, Deorling, Drunic,
Dwelve, High Elfish (fairies only), Merfolk, Mulch, Wyrm.

=== PAGE 29 ===
P a r t t W o | S t a r t i n g P l a y
27
BREGGLE TONGUES
Caprice
A language evolved among the breggle aristocracy of the
High Wold, encompassing greatly simplified elements of
the High Elfish tongue melded with the more eloquent
components of Gaffe. A large canon of literature exists in
this language, written at times in an abridged form of the
High Elfish script and at times in the Woldish script.
Learning: Caprice is in common use and easily learned.
Gaffe
The native tongue of lower ranking breggles: a melodic
language of bleats and gurgles. Gaffe includes many words
derived from Woldish and, though it is of utterly different
origin, shares a small number of words with the Sylvan
language.
Learning: Gaffe is in common use and easily learned.
THE SCRIPTURAL TONGUE
Liturgic
The holy language of the Pluritine Church, used exten-
sively in scripture and sermon. The origins of Liturgic lie in
a land far removed from Dolmenwood, but its usage is now
common throughout many lands due to the expansions of
the Church. It is a purely scriptural language and is seldom
spoken outside of sermons.
Learning: Liturgic is in common use and easily learned.
Fairies and demi-fey, as they have no spiritual connection
with the deities of mortals, cannot learn Liturgic and find
its tones somewhat unpleasant.
FAIRY TONGUES
The Immortal Tongue of Fairy
The language of the most elevated denizens of the Fairy
world—those ancient beings said to be older than the
mortal world itself. The immortal tongue is of such primal
potency that all sentient beings understand its honeyed
tones. However, only under the most incredibly porten-
tous circumstances may a mortal expect to hear this
speech. The most ancient of fairy folk are little more than
legend, and their language is practically mythical.
Learning: No mortal or lesser fairy may speak the undying
tongue, and those who attempt to study its treasury of
words are beset by hex and misfortune.
High Elfish
The language of the fairy nobility (for example, the Cold
Prince and his retinue) is a derivative of the Immortal
Tongue of Fairy. The predilection of fairy nobles for the
outlandishly baroque is reflected in the convoluted gram-
mar and voluminous lexicon.
Learning: Mortal scholars view High Elfish as the most
fiendishly complex language ever devised. Due to its intri-
cacy, this tongue is virtually impossible for non-fairies to
learn. Even fairies of the lower castes find it impenetrable.
Mewl
The secret language of the grimalkins and other cat-like
fairies. Mundane cats can also converse in this tongue
(often to their surprise!), if addressed, and prove eloquent
conversationalists.
Learning: Cat fairies take grave offence at others (espe-
cially mortals!) studying their language and go to great
lengths to prevent knowledge of its sprawling vocabulary
and subtle variations of yowl from propagating.
Sylvan
The common speech of the fairies and demi-fey of Dolmen-
wood, believed to be distantly derived from the Immortal
Tongue of Fairy.
Learning: Sylvan is in common use and easily learned.
Dwelve
The common speech of fairies and demi-fey that dwell in
the underworld beneath Dolmenwood, as well as those
with whom they trade. Distantly related to High Elfish.
Learning: Dwelve is not commonly spoken by surface
dwellers, but is easily learned by those with the desire.
THE MOSSLING TONGUE
Mulch
An obscure tongue spoken by mosslings and some sentient
species of plants and fungi.
Learning: The squelching, grinding sounds of which
Mulch consists are notoriously difficult for other Kindreds
to reproduce, though a handful of sages have made rudi-
mentary studies of the language.
DRUNIC TONGUES
Drunic
The language used for everyday communication among
the Drune, as well as in ritual, scripture, and historical
records. Numerous are the standing stones in Dolmen-
wood which are inscribed with runes of the Drunic tongue.
Learning: Drunic and its intricate script are a closely
guarded secret of the Drune.
Old Drunic
The sacred tongue of the ancestors of the Drune—an
esoteric language of great antiquity, only found in the
most ancient records in the hidden vaults of the Drune.
Learning: Old Drunic is virtually lost. Only the most
erudite Drune sages have any knowledge of it.

=== PAGE 30 ===
Part Three
Kindreds

=== PAGE 31 ===
O
h they’ve all come through my doors, darling! Every
kindred you’ve ever met and a few you’ve probably
never heard of. And don’t let the distinction fool you:
mortals, fairies, demi-fey. Who has a soul and who doesn’t?
All of that is theological balderdash. All folk bold or foolhardy
enough to step beneath the great green canopy of Dolmen-
wood share one absolutely delightful feature worth its weight
in song: they’re always, always full of surprises. Now, can I
interest you in a mug of Halthwidden’s? Finest ale in Prigwort,
or anywhere else, I promise.”
—Maydrid Hydball, Wrinkled Medlar proprietor
“

=== PAGE 32 ===
30
P a r t t h r e e | K i n D r e D S
Mortals, Fairies,
and Demi-Fey
On the three principal types of sentient folk in Dolmenwood.On the three principal types of sentient folk in Dolmenwood.
K
indreds of sentient folk are classified as one of
three types: mortal, fairy, or demi-fey. From
among the myriad Kindreds of each type that
inhabit Dolmenwood, this book presents six as playable
character options. This section describes the generalities
of fairies, mortals, and demi-fey. The Kindreds that players
can select are then elucidated in the following pages.
MORTALS
Kindreds whose origins are within the confines of the
mortal world.
Playable Kindreds: Breggles, humans, and mosslings.
Mortality
Mortals are swept along on the currents of time: ageing,
deteriorating, and dying like all things in the natural
world. Their lifespans are counted in decades, and they
suffer from all manner of diseases and ailments.
No Innate Magic
Aside from a few individuals gifted with a sensitivity to
arcane energies, mortal Kindreds have no innate magic.
The majority of mortal folk are mistrustful of magic,
regarding it as perilous and unnatural.
Religion and Worldview
Worship of deities and other powers (e.g. exalted heroes,
ancestors, spirits of the natural world) is common among
mortal folk—see Religion in Dolmenwood, p178. Religion
and worship often play a dominant role in their societies
and daily lives. Mortals who dedicate themselves to the
service of a religion may receive blessings in the form of
holy magic.
Mindset
Governed by the laws of time and nature, mortals tend to
be social creatures, banding together for safety and coop-
eration. The towns and villages of mortal folk in Dolmen-
wood act as a respite from the dangers of the wild.
Mossling Breggle Woodgrue Human Grimalkin Elf

=== PAGE 33 ===
P a r t t h r e e | K i n D r e D S
31
FAIRIES
Kindreds that originate in the undying world of Fairy.
Most fairies never venture into the mortal world, but some
romantic, obsessive, or adventurous individuals gain a
taste for the place and tarry for extended periods.
Playable Kindreds: Elves and grimalkins.
Immortality
While fairies may be killed, they remain untouched by the
ravages of time and do not die naturally. Likewise, fairies
are immune to diseases of non-magical origin.
Innate Magic
As natives of the other world, where the logic of the mortal
world does not hold, fairies possess innate magic—known
as glamours—that amazes and confounds mortals. Glam-
ours take many forms, but powers of illusion, inveigle-
ment, enchantment, and vanishing are common.
Otherworldliness
Unless disguised by magic, fairies always carry an air of
unearthliness about them in the mortal world. This may
be perceived by mortals as awe-inspiring, intoxicating,
fearsome, or dreadful. Animals invariably find fairies
unnerving.
Religion and Worldview
There are no gods in Fairy, and most fairy societies lack
formalised religions, instead giving rise to myriad baroque
cosmologies and philosophies of living. One common
conception is of a cosmic library wherein the deeds of
all creatures are recorded in tiny golden books (with
mortal lives as mere footnotes). The deities and powers
worshipped by mortals only concern themselves with
the mortal world and its natives. They have no spiritual
connection with fairies.
Mindset
Fairies are wracked with passions that run deeper than
mortals can fathom. They can be at once wise beyond
measure and petty as children, with an unwavering devo-
tion to their own personal whims. In Fairy, great king-
doms and hierarchies of nobility constrain the most fiery
impulses, but those fairies who come to Dolmenwood tend
to be individualists of bold and adventurous spirit.
DEMI-FEY
Kindreds of Fairy origin that have forsaken their native
world and taken up (more or less) permanent residence
in the mortal world. Over many generations, exposure to
time in the mortal world has changed demi-fey Kindreds
such that they are no longer true fairies.
Playable Kindreds: Woodgrues.
Gradual Mortality
Demi-fey no longer possess the immortality of their fore-
bears, ageing and dying akin to mortals. Their life spans,
however, are long, commonly stretching into a fourth
century. Likewise, demi-fey are susceptible to the diseases
of the mortal world.
Remnants of Innate Magic
Most demi-fey retain some aspects of the innate magic of
their fairy ancestors, but usually diminished by long expo-
sure to the mortal world or transformed into semi-innate
magical traditions passed down over generations.
Religion and Worldview
Like fairies, demi-fey have no spiritual connection with
the deities and powers of mortal religions. They tend to be
superstitious, rather than religious, each folk having accu-
mulated a body of odd beliefs and lore since their arrival
in the mortal world.
Mindset
Similarly to mortals, demi-fey tend to be social creatures,
though they rarely gather in large settlements. Demi-fey
cultures often evolve from the idiosyncratic beliefs and
habits of a handful of esteemed fairy ancestors.
Fairies, Cold Iron, and Silver
Susceptibility to cold iron: As the basest of all metals,
iron is anathema to the rarefied bodies of fairies. Fairies
suffer additional damage if hit with cold iron weapons
(see p119).
Repulsion to silver: While not as intrinsically harmful
to fairies as cold iron, mortal silver is more vehemently
scorned. The touch of the metal is repulsive to fairies,
instantly bringing on a queasiness of the stomach.
Demi-fey: Demi-fey retain their ancestors’ vulnerabil-
ity to cold iron, but have dwelt in the mortal world long
enough to become accustomed to mortal silver.
Fairy Adventurers in the Mortal World
Fairy PCs have chosen to come to the mortal world with-
out a direct means of return to Fairy. Players should
consider their reason for departure when creating fairy
characters. For example, the character may be in exile,
fleeing some peril, or simply wishing for a new start.

=== PAGE 34 ===
32
P a r t t h r e e | K i n D r e D S
Breggle
Goat-headed folk whose horn length indicates their social standing.Goat-headed folk whose horn length indicates their social standing.
Kindred Type Mortal
Level 1 PC Age 15 + 2d10 years
Lifespan 50 + 2d20 years
Height 5′4″ + 2d6″ (Medium)
Weight 120 + 6d10 lbs
Native Languages Woldish, Gaffe, Caprice
T
he proud and stubborn breggles—sometimes
called goatfolk (or hregl, in their own tongues)—
have inhabited the High Wold since antiquity.
Once the sole masters of that fertile region of hills, mead-
ows, and tangled woods, the ancient breggle noble houses
now rule alongside humans, swearing fealty to the Dukes
of Brackenwold. Breggles live much as humans do, dwell-
ing in hamlets, farmsteads, and castles. In the larger towns
of the High Wold, breggles live side by side with humans.
Shorthorns and Longhorns
Breggles divide themselves into two castes, differentiated
by horn length: shorthorns (the working class) and long-
horns (the noble class). Despite this division, shorthorns
and longhorns are in fact the same species. The horns of a
shorthorn who earns wealth and renown will grow, even-
tually reaching longhorn proportions (4″ or more). True
acceptance in the ruling class is, however, another matter.
Intermarriage With Humans
Humans and breggles occasionally marry and have chil-
dren. Socially, characters of half-breggle, half-human
parentage are seen as belonging to both Kindreds. They
tend to take strongly after one of their parents and, for
mechanical purposes, should be treated as either human
or breggle.
Crookhorns
Among the armies of the wicked Nag-Lord are a multi-
tude of corrupted breggles known as crookhorns, twisted
in mind and body by the evil magic of their master. The
breggles of the High Wold regard crookhorns as wretched
abominations, to be eradicated at any opportunity.
Religion and Ancestor Worship
As subjects of the duke, breggles are nominally adher-
ents of the Pluritine Church. True devotion to the Church
is, however, rare among breggles, who prefer to offer up
prayers to esteemed ancestors from their long history—see
Aud frengd Hlerr, p179.
KINDRED RELATIONS
Breggles are on friendly terms with mortal and demi-fey
Kindreds. Most non-adventuring breggles have never met
a fairy and regard them with awe, wonder, and caution.
Breggle folklore is filled with tales of the ancient nobility
of fairies, as well as their tricksome magic.
In human settlements within the High Wold, breggles are
a commonplace sight, many living alongside humans.
Further afield, humans tend to treat them with respect
and caution, as the power of the longhorn noble houses is
known and feared.
NAMES
A small number of breggle surnames are shared by humans
native to the High Wold, the two Kindreds having lived side
by side for many centuries.
Naming a character: Either choose a first name and
surname from the table below, roll for each, or invent
something in a similar vein.
BREGGLE NAMES
d20 Male Female Unisex Surname
1 Aele Aedel Addle Blathergripe
2 Braembel Berrild Andred Bluegouge
3 Broob Bredhr Blocke Bockbrugh
4 Crump Draed Clover Bockstump
5 Drerdl Fannigrew Crewwin Elbowgen
6 Frennig Frandorup Curlip Forlocke
7 Grerg Grendilore Eleye Hwodlow
8 Gripe Grendl Ellip Lankshorn
9 Llerg Grewigg Frannidore Lockehorn
10 Llrod Hildrup Ghrend Longbeard
11 Lope Hraigl Grennigore Longshanks
12 Mashker Hwendl Gwendl Shankwold
13 Olledg Maybel Hrannick Smallbuck
14 Rheg Myrkle Hwoldrup Snicklebock
15 Shadgore Nannigrew Lindor Snidebleat
16 Shadwell Pettigrew Merrild Snoode
17 Shadwicke Rrhimbr Smenthard Underbleat
18 Shandor Shord Snerg Underbuck
19 Shank Smethra Wendlow Wolder
20 Snerd Wheld Windor Woldleap
EXTRA DETAILS
The tables on the following pages may be used to add extra
details to breggle Player Characters. Roll on as many tables
as desired, or use them as inspiration for crafting addi-
tional character details.

=== PAGE 35 ===
P a r t t h r e e | K i n D r e D S
33
CHOOSING A CLASS
Breggle adventurers are most commonly fighters, knights,
or magicians. They seldom seek membership of the Pluri-
tine Church as clerics or friars, and only rare individu-
als have enough of a connection with Fairy to become
enchanters.
FUR
A breggle character’s thick, woolly fur grants them +1 AC
when unarmoured or wearing Light armour.
GAZE
Upon attaining longhorn status (from Level 4), a breggle
character can use their gaze to charm humans and short-
horns into obeisance.
Activating: The longhorn must gaze intently at an individ-
ual human or shorthorn.
Effect: If the target fails a Save Versus Spell, they are
charmed to view the longhorn character with awe and
respect. While charmed, the target is unable to harm the
longhorn, either directly or indirectly.
Duration: Until next sunrise.
Resisting: The holy spell Mantle of Protection counters a
longhorn’s gaze.
Usage frequency: A longhorn may use their gaze a limited
number of times per day, depending on their Level—see
the Breggle Advancement table. The gaze may be used on
a specific subject at most once a day.
HORNS
Breggles may make a melee attack with their horns instead
of a weapon. The damage inflicted increases with Level, as
indicated in the Breggle Advancement table.
Horn Length and Social Standing
A breggle character begins play as a commoner of the
shorthorn caste, aspiring to improve their lot in life. As
they advance in Level, gaining experience, wealth, and
renown, their horns grow (see the Breggle Advancement
table).
Longhorn Status
Upon reaching Level 4, a breggle character’s horns have
grown to the point that the character is recognised as a
longhorn.
BREGGLE ADVANCEMENT
Horns
Level Length Damage Gaze
1 1″ 1d4 –
2 2″ 1d4 –
3 3″ 1d4 + 1 –
4 4″ 1d4 + 1 1 / day
5 6″ 1d4 + 1 1 / day
6 8″ 1d6 2 / day
7 10″ 1d6 2 / day
8 12″ 1d6 3 / day
9 14″ 1d6 + 1 3 / day
10+ 16″ 1d6 + 2 4 / day

=== PAGE 36 ===
34
P a r t t h r e e | K i n D r e D S
BREGGLE BACKGROUNDS
d20 Background d20 Background
1 Alchemist’s assistant 11 Onion farmer
2 Angler 12 Page
3 Beekeeper 13 Pig farmer
4 Blacksmith 14 Servant
5 Brewer 15 Smuggler
6 Chandler 16 Sorcerer’s assistant
7 Devil goat handler 17 Standard-bearer
8 Gambler 18 Thatcher
9 Grave digger 19 Turnip farmer
10 Merchant 20 Vagrant
Devil goats: Known as Augfrlad in Caprice. Large, carnivorous goats bred by certain breggle nobles for use as fiercely loyal guardi-
ans or ceremonial mounts.
BREGGLE TRINKETS
d100 Trinket
01–02 A bag of divination stones that always answer “Panic”
to any question.
03–04 A bloodstained jester’s hat.
05–06 A bloody knife that cannot be cleaned.
07–08 A blue velvet jacket with a hidden pocket which
moves when you’re not looking. Every time you want
to retrieve something from the pocket, it takes a
minute of searching to find it.
09–10 A book of poetry that consists primarily of bleating.
11–12 A bottle of noxious perfume. When sprayed, it can be
smelt up to half a mile away.
13–14 A brass owl statue with eerie black eyes.
15–16 A broken fishing rod that still displays teeth marks
from an enormous fish.
17–18 A circular ceramic amulet which displays the current
moon phase.
19–20 A clay pot labelled “Frog Paste,” containing what
appears to be frog paste.
21–22 A clump of writhing, black moss that you scraped off
a looming monolith one lonely night.
23–24 A collection of papers with scrawled notes detailing
your life story. The odd thing is that you found these
notes on the corpse of a stranger, drowned in a ditch.
25–26 A curious mossling wind instrument carved out of a
gourd. You can’t figure out which hole to blow in.
27–28 A diorama of two stuffed mice riding stuffed squir-
rels, jousting.
29–30 A dried mushroom with a face.
31–32 A folio of pressed sprite-wings.
33–34 A gnarled root shaped like a mossling.
35–36 A letter warning that several unnamed but high-
ranked longhorns are secretly crookhorns in
disguise.
37–38 A locket with a portrait of a fluffy cat wearing a crown
with the inscription “For the love of King Pusskin.”
39–40 A long-nosed masquerade mask.
41–42 A moleskin wristband, anointed with exotic fairy
perfume.
43–44 A mossling pipe that blows rainbow-coloured smoke
rings.
d100 Trinket
45–46 A necklace of miscellaneous humanoid teeth.
47–48 A petrified turnip.
49–50 A pig heart that oozes ichor when squeezed.
51–52 A pouch which feels heavy (as if full of pebbles) even
when empty.
53–54 A rusty scalpel that once belonged to Lord Malbleat.
55–56 A sack of tasty fried chicken legs.
57–58 A scale said to be from a breggle with a fishtail
instead of legs.
59–60 A scroll containing a prophetic warning from an
esteemed ancestor. Age has made it almost indeci-
pherable.
61–62 A sheet of parchment with a charcoal sketch of your
long lost love.
63–64 A short length of silver cord and a delicate hook, said
to be able to catch fairy fish in puddles.
65–66 A shovel stained with the dirt of a thousand graves.
67–68 A stuffed vole dressed in a charming waistcoat.
69–70 A thigh-bone flute.
71–72 A tin whistle whose tones drive cats wild.
73–74 A tiny book of nonsense poetry, bound in purple
leather.
75–76 A tiny painting of a four-horned goat.
77–78 A well-loved walking stick with a goat’s head handle.
79–80 A wooden Chapes (holy symbol of the Pluritine
Church) studded with nails.
81–82 An empty notebook. Anything written in it disap-
pears at sunrise.
83–84 An ornate pie pan, pilfered from a noble’s kitchen.
85–86 Black stone dice with white skulls for pips.
87–88 Expensive-looking (but worthless) jewellery,
designed for breggle horns.
89–90 String from the bow of a legendary hunter.
91–92 The board pieces for fairy chess. You have no idea
what the rules are (or even if it’s a real game).
93–94 The cured skin of a whole deer.
95–96 The horn of an ancestor, hung from a necklace.
97–98 The key to the prison cell you escaped from.
99–00 Your grandmother’s creepy glass eye. You sometimes
feel her presence watching you.
Encumbrance: Small trinkets weigh 10 coins. The Referee
should judge the weight of larger items.

=== PAGE 37 ===
P a r t t h r e e | K i n D r e D S
35
HEAD
d12 Head
1 Dented helm with coat of arms
2 Ears pierced with nails or rings
3 Long, curly locks
4 Long, floppy ears
5 Narrow, pointed ears
6 One bent horn, one straight
7 One horn broken off
8 Silver stripe in hair
9 Slick, oiled hair
10 Spiky ginger hair
11 Thin neck, hefty head
12 Third nub horn on forehead
FACE
d12 Face
1 Black eyes, silver pupils
2 Buck teeth
3 Bushy brows
4 Golden eyes
5 Lank forelock droops over eyes
6 Long, wispy chin-beard
7 Milky white eyes, blue flecks
8 Missing teeth
9 Prominent scar
10 Shaggy chin-beard
11 Small eyes, close set
12 Wide, drooling mouth
FUR
d12 Fur
1 Black, flecked with silver
2 Black, glossy
3 Ginger, curly
4 Ginger, rough
5 Grey, greasy
6 Grey, lustrous
7 Russet, spiky
8 Russet, wavy
9 Tan, coarse
10 Tan, shaggy
11 White, dirty
12 White, fluffy
SPEECH
d12 Speech
1 Cackling
2 Circuitous
3 Coarse
4 Gurgling
5 High-pitched
6 Lackadaisical
7 Mumbling
8 Rumbling
9 Staccato
10 Throaty
11 Warbling
12 Whining
DEMEANOUR
d12 Demeanour
1 Ale-addled
2 Cool-headed pragmatist
3 Cultivated aristocratic air
4 Dour, pessimistic
5 Earnest, loyal
6 Endlessly scheming
7 Flighty, mercurial
8 Jocular with violent outbursts
9 Mellow, unflappable
10 Single-minded, stubborn
11 Wild hedonist
12 Wryly philosophical
DRESS
d12 Dress
1 Doublet and frilly shirt
2 Greasy woollens
3 Grimy apron
4 Huge, hairy overcoat
5 Long skirts and cloak
6 Patched leather, many pockets
7 Rabbit and squirrel fur
8 Servant’s livery
9 Thigh boots and waistcoat
10 Thong and dashing cape
11 Tweed and deerstalker
12 Wide, armless frock
DESIRES
d12 Desires
1 Eradicate the Drune
2 Escape justice for past crime
3 Found a crime syndicate
4 Free the common folk
5 Imprison all crookhorns
6 Marry into nobility
7 Outrageous wealth and luxury
8 Popularise turnip ale
9 Recover ancient breggle lore
10 Restore High Wold to Ramius
11 Swindle Lord Murkin’s wealth
12 Travel and discovery
BELIEFS
d12 Beliefs
1 Ancestors demand sacrifices
2 Breggles made standing stones
3 Breggles originate in Fairy
4 Church hides breggle saints
5 Daily garlic wards fairy hexes
6 Descendant of a mighty wizard
7 Duke is thrall of the Drune
8 Fairy is purely mythical
9 Malbleat serves the Nag-Lord
10 Malbleat will rule High Wold
11 Nag-Lord is breggle messiah
12 The end is nigh

=== PAGE 38 ===
36
P a r t t h r e e | K i n D r e D S
Elf
Ageless fairies who have crossed into the mortal world for reasons they seldom reveal.Ageless fairies who have crossed into the mortal world for reasons they seldom reveal.
Kindred Type Fairy
Level 1 PC Age 1d100 × 10 years
Lifespan Immortal
Height 5′ + 2d6″ (Medium)
Weight 100 + 3d10 lbs
Native Languages Woldish, Sylvan, High Elfish
A
s humans dominate the mortal world with their
cities and kingdoms, elves do so Fairy. Among all
the myriad peoples of the undying world, elves
are driven to forge vast kingdoms, to subjugate others
under their rule, and to delve deeply into the secrets of
magic. Among their number are mighty lords and fear-
some enchantresses, ageless sages and dashing knights,
lowly rogues and hapless wanderers.
Appear Human-Like But Otherworldly
Elves are physically similar to humans but vary widely
in appearance, with features such as pointed ears, small
horns, or star-shaped pupils marking them as non-human.
It is always possible to identify an elf for they carry an air
of unearthliness about them (unless disguised by magic).
Elves of Many Kinds
In the boundless reaches of Fairy and its countless king-
doms, many kinds of elves are found: the pale elves of the
lightless realms, the dark-skinned, crystal-rimed elves of
the cloud palaces, the cold-hearted frost elves who serve
the wicked Cold Prince, and countless others.
Affairs With Humans
While elves rarely settle permanently in the mortal world,
they occasionally have affairs and trysts with humans. The
children of such pairings are seen as belonging to both
human and elf Kindreds. They tend to take strongly after
one of their parents and, for mechanical purposes, should
be treated as either human or elf.
KINDRED RELATIONS
The adventuresome elves who wander in the mortal world
tend to be fascinated with mortal Kindreds, their short,
spirited lifespans, and their inevitable ageing and death.
Some elves view mortal company as peculiar and enter-
taining, while others earnestly seek to comprehend the
mortal mindset. Elves tend to be on good terms with demi-
fey and other fairies.
In Dolmenwood’s human settlements, elves may be met
with awe and caution. Most everyday humans have never
met a fairy of any kind, and their folklore is stuffed with
tales of the wickedness and treachery of elves in ancient
times, when the Cold Prince ruled all of Dolmenwood.
NAMES
Elves enjoy being addressed by curious epithets hinting
at their names in the tongues of Fairy (which they never
reveal to mortals). Epithets are broadly divided into rustic
and courtly, depending on the elf’s origin or the persona
they choose to present.
Nicknames: Elves who frequent Dolmenwood sometimes
take on a nickname (for example, a shortened version of
their epithet) or a mortal name, for convenience.
Naming a character: Either choose a name from the table
below, roll for a name, or invent something in a similar
vein.
ELF NAMES
d20 Rustic Courtly
1 Bucket-and-Broth Begets-Only-Dreams
2 Candle-Bent-Sidewise Breath-Upon-Candlelight
3 Glance-Askew-Guillem Chalice-of-Duskviolet
4 Jack-of-Many-Colours Dream-of-Remembrance
5 Lace-and-Polkadot Gleanings-of-Lost-Days
6 Lament-of-Bones-Broken Hands-Bound-By-Crows
7 Lightly-Come-Softly Impudence-Hath-Victory
8 Lillies-o’er-Heartsight Indigo-and-Patchwork
9 Prick-of-the-Nail Marry-No-Man
10 Silver-and-Quicksilver Morning’s-Last-Mists
11 Spring-to-the-Queen Murder-of-Ravens
12 Sprue-Upon-Gallows Quavering-of-Night
13 Sun’s-Turning-Tide Revenge’s-Sweet-Scent
14 Supper-Before-Noon Seven-Steps-At-Dawn
15 Too-Soon-Begotten Shade-of-Winter-Betrayal
16 Trick-of-the-Light Shallow-Pained-Plight
17 Tryst-about-Town Shallow-Spirit’s-Lament
18 Tumble-and-Thimble Slips-Behind-Shadows
19 Wine-By-The-Goblet Spring-Noon’s-Arrogance
20 Youth-Turned-Curdled Violet-and-Clementine
EXTRA DETAILS
The tables on the following pages may be used to add extra
details to elf Player Characters. Roll on as many of these
tables as desired, or use them as inspiration for crafting
additional character details.

=== PAGE 39 ===
P a r t t h r e e | K i n D r e D S
37
CHOOSING A CLASS
Elf adventurers are commonly enchanters, fighters, hunt-
ers, or magicians. It is rare for an elf to be accepted into the
ranks of Dolmenwood nobility as a knight. Elves cannot be
clerics or friars as they have no spiritual connection with
the deities of mortals.
ELF SKILLS
Elves have a Skill Target of 5 for Listen and Search.
GLAMOURS
Elves possess minor magical talents known as glamours
(see p94). Each elf knows a single, randomly determined
glamour.
IMMORTALITY
Elves can be killed but do not die naturally. They are
immune to diseases of non-magical origin. Elves also
cannot die of thirst or starvation, though a lack of suste-
nance drives them desperate and sadistic (see p153).
MAGIC RESISTANCE
As beings of Fairy, where magic is in the very fabric of
things, elves are highly resistant to magic. They gain +2
Magic Resistance (see Magic Resistance, p17).
UNEARTHLY BEAUTY
Elves—both benevolent and wicked—are beautiful by
mortal standards. When interacting with mortals, an elf
gains a +2 bonus to Charisma (to a maximum of 18).
VULNERABLE TO COLD IRON
As fairies, cold iron weapons inflict +1 damage on elves.
(e.g. a cold iron shortsword would inflict 1d6+1 damage on
an elf, rather than the standard 1d6).

=== PAGE 40 ===
38
P a r t t h r e e | K i n D r e D S
ELF BACKGROUNDS
d20 Background d20 Background
1 Chronicler 11 Librarian
2 Coiffeur 12 Mountebank
3 Confectioner 13 Nut forager
4 Courtier 14 Peacock trainer
5 Dream thief 15 Poet
6 Elk hunter 16 Swordsmith
7 Explorer 17 Tailor
8 Frost sculptor 18 Thespian
9 Harpist 19 Unicorn handler
10 Highway robber 20 Vintner
Encumbrance: Small trinkets weigh 10 coins. The Referee
should judge the weight of larger items.
ELF TRINKETS
d100 Trinket
01–02 A bag of caterpillars whose flesh have hallucinogenic
properties.
03–04 A bag of sticky sweets that never get any smaller
when sucked on.
05–06 A ball of silvery twine that is invisible in moonlight.
07–08 A ball of yarn, gifted to you by a grateful grimalkin.
09–10 A black rose that never wilts.
11–12 A block of chocolate made with cocoa harvested from
a mossling.
13–14 A book of amateur poetry. You suspect the author to
be a powerful Fairy noble.
15–16 A crown woven from holly and poison ivy.
17–18 A daisy that glows in moonlight.
19–20 A fancy hat topped with elk antlers.
21–22 A fragment of glowing crystal that you found in a
dream.
23–24 A fragment of horn from an evil unicorn.
25–26 A glass bottle that annihilates any liquid poured into
it.
27–28 A glass jar containing the tiny, frozen form of your
only sister.
29–30 A glass slipper, stained with blood.
31–32 A harp that, if left unattended, plays mood-inap-
propriate music with the skill of an enthusiastic
amateur.
33–34 A Chapes (holy symbol of the Pluritine Church), given
to you by a dying friar decades ago.
35–36 A key fashioned from ice. It melts in the warmth, and
reforms in cold weather.
37–38 A lantern that burns with a cold, blue flame when lit.
39–40 A letter promising your imminent demise, written in
High Elfish. Delivered over a hundred years ago.
41–42 A mortal’s heart, freely given.
43–44 A mote of sunlight, trapped in a scintillating crystal.
45–46 A necklace composed of honeybees.
47–48 A nightmare, sealed inside a bottle.
49–50 A pan flute stolen from a woodgrue. A single pipe is
missing.
51–52 A peacock feather whose eye intermittently blinks.
53–54 A pleasant dream, distilled into a liquor.
d100 Trinket
55–56 A receipt for a loan of four rare and expensive tomes
from a Fairy library. You no longer have any of these
books.
57–58 A scabbard taken from the fallen body of a great
knight.
59–60 A sealed scroll. Allegedly contains one of the Goblin
King’s myriad names, never spoken.
61–62 A seemingly ordinary acorn. Screams when its cap is
removed.
63–64 A set of horseshoes, designed for a centaur.
65–66 A silver spoon that drips honey on command.
67–68 A single crow feather, taken from the cloak of the
Queen of Blackbirds.
69–70 A skeletal finger that scrapes and scratches at dusk. If
provided with a means of making marks (e.g. dipped
in ink or blood, a surface that can be scratched), it
writes macabre prophecies.
71–72 A small bell shaped like a breggle’s eye. Faint bleating
accompanies its ringing.
73–74 A spider that slowly weaves webs in the shape of
clothing.
75–76 A spyglass that always shows a view of a sea at night.
77–78 A thimble that is always magically full of sweet
liqueur.
79–80 A white-and-gold parasol that creates darkness
directly underneath it.
81–82 A wolf pelt cloak. The wolf’s head is still attached and
occasionally salivates.
83–84 An ancient bronze mask depicting a bearded face.
85–86 An empty wine bottle. When held over a liquid, it
draws it inside until full.
87–88 An hourglass which constantly flows in one direc-
tion. It cannot be inverted.
89–90 An icicle that never melts.
91–92 Bronze chimes that tinkle in the presence of both
ghosts and strong breezes.
93–94 Sculpting tools, preternaturally cold to the touch.
95–96 Six vials of blood, each drawn from a different
Kindred.
97–98 Star charts that match no sky seen from Dolmen-
wood.
99–00 The severed tail of a fairy horse.

=== PAGE 41 ===
P a r t t h r e e | K i n D r e D S
39
HEAD
d12 Head
1 Delicate, pointed ears
2 Floppy, ass-like ears
3 Flowing, silver hair
4 Foppish wig
5 Glossy, iridescent hair
6 Gold hair at day, grey at night
7 Hair as white as snow
8 Hair like cobwebs
9 Lustrous, waist-length hair
10 Ragged, cropped hair
11 Shadowy locks
12 Small, ivory horn nubs
FACE
d12 Face
1 Androgynous
2 Eye colour shifts with season
3 Feline eyes
4 Frosted blue lips
5 Glow of candlelight on skin
6 Long, distinguished nose
7 Pale and mask-like
8 Spotted with soot
9 Star-shaped pupils
10 Violet eyes
11 Wide-eyed, childlike
12 Wide-set almond eyes
BODY
d12 Body
1 Aroma of mead or honey
2 Aura of dancing glimmers
3 Bluish skin
4 Faintly insubstantial
5 Golden blood, silver tears
6 Lithe frame, sex unclear
7 Odour of fresh spring dew
8 Pale skin, black in mirrors
9 Skin appears moonlit
10 Skin of a newborn
11 Skin rimed with frost
12 Sparkling skin
SPEECH
d12 Speech
1 Condescending
2 Distant and slightly echoing
3 Flat and toneless
4 Flirtatious
5 Like the cracking of ice
6 Lilting
7 Mirthful
8 Pitch changes: deep/high
9 Poetic and obscure
10 Song and rhyme
11 Subtly threatening
12 Whispering
DEMEANOUR
d12 Demeanour
1 Affected nobility
2 Aloof and amoral
3 Childlike and mischievous
4 Decadent
5 Gleeful enthusiasm
6 Keenly naive
7 Loquacious
8 Melancholic aesthete
9 Obsessive
10 Sardonic observer
11 Wilful and whimsical
12 World-weary
DRESS
d12 Dress
1 Chequered harlequin
2 Cloak of black feathers
3 Cloak of frost
4 Cobwebs and soot
5 Decaying regal finery
6 Elaborately embroidered
7 Extravagant, frilly lace
8 Lace and flowers
9 Mother of pearl gown
10 Sheer black
11 Silvery gossamer
12 Woven leaves
DESIRES
d12 Desires
1 Break mortal hearts
2 Collect exotic stuffed beasts
3 Depose fairy lord or lady
4 Distil wines from emotions
5 Forbidden arcane lore
6 Library of dreams
7 Odd magical trinkets
8 Return of the Cold Prince
9 Savour finest of mortal life
10 To grow old and die
11 Understand mortal religion
12 Usurp noble house
BELIEFS
d12 Beliefs
1 All plants are sentient
2 Cats are disguised fairies
3 Daylight is to be shunned
4 Drink only fine wine
5 Magic is the true language
6 Mortal world is but a dream
7 Mortals evolved from fungi
8 Reality is a fabulous song
9 The world is dying
10 Time is seeping into Fairy
11 Understand speech of stars
12 Witches led by fairy queen

=== PAGE 42 ===
40
P a r t t h r e e | K i n D r e D S
Grimalkin
Mercurial feline fairies who shift between three different forms.Mercurial feline fairies who shift between three different forms.
Kindred Type Fairy
Level 1 PC Age 1d100 × 10 years
Lifespan Immortal
Height 2′6″ + 2d6″ (Small)
Weight 50 + 3d10 lbs
Native Languages Woldish, Mewl
G
rimalkins are shape-shifting cat-fairies renowned
for their magic of illusion and their love of eating
rats. They can take on three different forms,
described below. Grimalkins originate in the fairy realm of
Catland, ruled over by the fearsome Queen Abyssinia—the
Queen of All Cats. Those grimalkins who enter Dolmen-
wood live as wanderers and adventurers.
Cunning Humanoid Form—Estray
A grimalkin’s normal form is that of a humanoid cat, wear-
ing clothing, speaking, and walking upright. A grimalkin
in estray is, by all appearances, a humanoid cat, beautiful
or ugly, with fur covering their little body.
Fat Moggy Form—Chester
In chester, a grimalkin resembles a normal cat in all
respects—though perhaps fatter than the average mouser.
A grimalkin in chester can understand language, but can
only respond in wordless yowls and meows.
Fey Predator Form—Wilder
The primal, fey form of a grimalkin. A grimalkin in wilder
is difficult to perceive clearly in the mortal world as more
than a gleaming pair of deranged, predatory eyes beyond
the throw of the lantern’s light.
KINDRED RELATIONS
The adventuresome grimalkins who wander in the mortal
world tend to become jealous and furtive among their own
kind, so they prefer the company of other Kindreds. They
enjoy the companionship of other fairies and demi-fey,
holding a special fondness for the frivolity of woodgrues.
They regard the earnest undertakings of humans and other
mortal Kindreds as comical and somewhat absurd.
Grimalkins are greeted with curiosity and wonder in
human settlements in Dolmenwood, perhaps due to
humans’ affection for domestic cats.
NAMES
Grimalkin names tend to be non-gendered. Exceptions
(and titles) are listed in the table with male/female vari-
ants. It is uncertain whether grimalkins choose such
cutesy, whimsical names in earnest or whether they are
mocking mortals by forcing them to utter such drivel. It is
also not known whether the noble titles claimed by some
grimalkins have any truth behind them (though, of course,
the bearers of such titles swear to their authenticity).
Naming a character: Either choose a first name and
surname from the table below, roll for each, or invent
something in a similar vein.
GRIMALKIN NAMES
d20 First Name Surname
1 Boots Bobblewhisk
2 Fripple Cottonsocks
3 Ginger Flip-a-tail
4 Jack/Jill Flippancy
5 Jaspy Fluff-a-kin
6 Jasqueline Grimalgrime
7 Kitty Grinser
8 Little Lickling
9 Lord/Lady Milktongue
10 Mogget Mogglin
11 Moggle Poppletail
12 Monsieur/Madame Pouncemouse
13 Nibbles Pusskin
14 Penny Ratbane
15 Poppet Snuffle
16 Prince/Princess Tailwhisk
17 Prissy Tippler
18 Tippsy Whippletongue
19 Tomkin Whipsy
20 Toppsy Whiskers
EXTRA DETAILS
The tables on the following pages may be used to add extra
details to grimalkin Player Characters. Roll on as many
of these tables as desired, or use them as inspiration for
crafting additional character details.

=== PAGE 43 ===
P a r t t h r e e | K i n D r e D S
41
CHOOSING A CLASS
Grimalkin adventurers are commonly bards, enchant-
ers, hunters, or thieves. It is rare for a grimalkin to be
accepted into the ranks of Dolmenwood nobility as a
knight. Grimalkins cannot be clerics or friars as they have
no spiritual connection with the deities of mortals.
ARMOUR AND WEAPONS
Armour must be tailored to grimalkins’ small size. Like-
wise, grimalkins cannot wield Large weapons (see p118).
DEFENSIVE BONUS
In melee with Large creatures, grimalkins gain a +2 Armour
Class bonus, due to their small size.
EATING GIANT RODENTS
After spending 1 Turn devouring a freshly killed giant
rodent, a grimalkin heals 1 Hit Point.
GLAMOURS
Grimalkins possess minor magical talents known as glam-
ours (see p94). Each grimalkin knows a single, randomly
determined glamour.
GRIMALKIN SKILLS
Grimalkins have a Skill Target of 5 for Listen.
IMMORTALITY
Grimalkins can be killed but do not die naturally. They are
immune to diseases of non-magical origin. Grimalkins
also cannot die of thirst or starvation, though a lack of
sustenance drives them desperate and sadistic (see p153).
MAGIC RESISTANCE
As beings of Fairy, where magic is in the very fabric of
things, grimalkins are highly resistant to magic. They gain
+2 Magic Resistance (see Magic Resistance, p17).
SHAPE-SHIFTING
A grimalkin can spend 1 Round to transform into either
a fat domestic cat (chester) or a primal fey form (wilder).
Capabilities: When transformed, a grimalkin cannot use
weapons, magic (e.g. glamours or spells), or any special
Class capabilities (e.g. thief skills).
Equipment: All gear carried is optionally transformed with
the character, reappearing when they return to humanoid
form.
Chester (Unlimited Usage)
Combat: The character has Armour Class 12, Speed 30, and
may make a bite and two claw attacks each Round. Each
attack inflicts 1 point of damage.
Speech: The character can understand language, but can
only respond in wordless yowls and meows.
Changing back: Takes 1 Round. Only possible when the
grimalkin is unobserved by any other sentient being.
Wilder (Once a Day)
Entering wilder: A grimalkin may only transform into
wilder when in melee and at less than half of their maxi-
mum Hit Points. On entering wilder, the character heals
2d6 Hit Points.
Near-invisible: Only the grimalkin’s deranged eyes are
visible. Opponents who cannot see the invisible suffer a –2
penalty to Attack Rolls against the grimalkin. Those who
can see the invisible discern a bulky feline form, 3′ high,
with a leering grin and fur standing electrified on end.
Combat: The character has Armour Class 13, Speed 30, and
may make a bite and two claw attacks each Round, with a
+2 bonus to Attack Rolls. Each attack inflicts 1d4 damage.
Fey chaos: The grimalkin cannot distinguish friend from
foe, indiscriminately attacking the nearest creature.
After 2d4 Rounds: The grimalkin instantly returns to their
humanoid (estray) form.
VULNERABLE TO COLD IRON
As fairies, cold iron weapons inflict +1 damage on
grimalkins. (e.g. a cold iron shortsword would inflict 1d6+1
damage on a grimalkin, rather than the standard 1d6).

=== PAGE 44 ===
42
P a r t t h r e e | K i n D r e D S
GRIMALKIN BACKGROUNDS
d20 Background d20 Background
1 Alchemist’s aide 11 Mariner
2 Angler 12 Pheasant poacher
3 Barber 13 Rat hunter
4 Card-sharp 14 Spy
5 Catnip brewer 15 Stage magician
6 Clothier 16 Swindler
7 Duellist 17 Thespian
8 Highway robber 18 Trapper / furrier
9 Knifemaker 19 Vole farmer
10 Libertine 20 Weasel tamer
Encumbrance: Small trinkets weigh 10 coins. The Referee
should judge the weight of larger items.
GRIMALKIN TRINKETS
d100 Trinket
01–02 A bicorne hat that is a foot deeper on the inside than
it appears.
03–04 A book of long-forgotten laws, written in Old Woldish.
05–06 A brass thimble that turns water into milk.
07–08 A breggle tongue, still moist.
09–10 A cherry tart pilfered from the kitchen of a fairy
noble.
11–12 A cloak fashioned from a hundred voles.
13–14 A copper coin that always lands on the same side
when deliberately flipped.
15–16 A crimson feather from an enormous bird.
17–18 A dead crow that never rots.
19–20 A deck of playing cards that shuffles itself when left
unattended.
21–22 A dried heart the size of an acorn.
23–24 A hairball coughed up by a famous grimalkin.
25–26 A handkerchief stained with the kiss of Queen Abys-
sinia.
27–28 A heart-shaped locket. Each time it’s opened, it
contains a portrait of a different cat.
29–30 A human eye that dilates just before it rains.
31–32 A hundred-year-old note offering a favour in return
for services rendered to a witch. Her descendants
might be obligated to fulfil it.
33–34 A leaf from the tallest tree in Dolmenwood.
35–36 A letter begging you to aid a miller’s youngest child.
37–38 A live cockroach tied to a thin gold string. If the cock-
roach is removed or killed, a new one appears in its
place when the sun rises.
39–40 A lucky tortoise shell.
41–42 A lute that is always out of tune in the morning and in
tune in the evening.
43–44 A luxurious, gold-embroidered cushion.
45–46 A mouse skull on a string. (Allegedly, a mouse from
the moon.)
47–48 A mushroom stolen from the head of a mossling.
49–50 A nightingale’s song, trapped in a locket.
d100 Trinket
51–52 A pair of boots that will never go out of fashion.
53–54 A pair of dice that, when rolled together, always total
to nine.
55–56 A pink bow that cannot turn invisible under any
circumstances.
57–58 A pocket watch that always tells you the correct time
an hour ago.
59–60 A porcelain teacup with a salamander painted on the
side. Warm liquids it holds never cool down.
61–62 A rabbit’s foot that sporadically twitches.
63–64 A rat king in a sack. Each rat inside claims to be the
“King of All Rats.”
65–66 A realistic mask of a human child.
67–68 A scroll depicting your royal lineage. Of dubious
authenticity.
69–70 A set of keys on a golden ring, purloined from a noble.
71–72 A severed head of a sprite, dried and preserved.
73–74 A sewing needle, sized for a giant. (Treat as a dagger.)
75–76 A shard of cold iron, trapped in a glass sphere.
77–78 A single cat whisker, given to you as a sign of commit-
ment.
79–80 A singular pipe, taken from a woodgrue’s pan flute.
81–82 A small vial containing a legendarily potent strain of
catnip.
83–84 A tiny bell that makes no sound.
85–86 A trained, but not particularly smart, weasel.
87–88 A whistle that only dogs can’t hear.
89–90 A wolf’s paw that bleeds when the wolf is thinking of
you.
91–92 A wooden door the shape and size of a mouse.
93–94 An eyepatch, stained with old blood.
95–96 An ogre’s toenail, tough as steel. Its owner still lives.
97–98 Eyeglasses haunted by benign ghosts. Wearing the
glasses allows you to see them.
99–00 One of a pair of bracelets made from braided mouse
tails.

=== PAGE 45 ===
P a r t t h r e e | K i n D r e D S
43
HEAD
d12 Head
1 Carefully sculpted quiff
2 Dapper top hat
3 Extravagant ear fur
4 Floppy beret
5 Floppy ear
6 Jaunty tricorn hat
7 Plumed hat
8 Pointy ear tufts
9 Shaggy mane
10 Spotted headscarf
11 Torn ear
12 Unrealistically large
FACE
d12 Face
1 Bug-eyed
2 Constantly looks surprised
3 Copper, saucer-like eyes
4 Extra fluffy cheeks
5 Extravagantly long whiskers
6 Flabby jowls
7 Flashing silver eyes
8 Long, pointy snout
9 Mostly mouth
10 Snaggle-toothed
11 Snub nose
12 Tongue pokes out
FUR
d12 Fur
1 Black
2 Black and white
3 Blue
4 Brown tabby
5 Chocolate
6 Ginger tabby
7 Iridescent
8 Silver, fluffy
9 Tortoiseshell
10 Violet
11 White, spiky
12 White, fluffy
SPEECH
d12 Speech
1 Adorable mewling
2 Conspiratorial whispering
3 Decadently fashionable
4 Eloquent and poetic
5 Impertinent
6 Languid
7 Manic
8 Meandering
9 Mirthful and mocking
10 Purring
11 Sycophantic
12 Wilfully abstruse
DEMEANOUR
d12 Demeanour
1 Boastful
2 Fastidious and precise
3 Irreverently jocund
4 Jittery and on edge
5 Loose with money
6 Mercurial
7 Reckless swashbuckler
8 Self-indulgent preening
9 Slumbersome
10 Sneaky and larcenous
11 Snobbish gourmet
12 Tipsy and frolicsome
DRESS
d12 Dress
1 Cape and spurs
2 Dandyish lace and silks
3 Festooned with rat bones
4 Jet black woollens
5 Long gloves and chaps
6 Long, colourful knitted scarf
7 Pied doublet and breeches
8 Ratskin vest and breeches
9 Regal ermine cloak
10 Shiny red boots
11 Smart tweed
12 Tassels and fringes
DESIRES
d12 Desires
1 Become a crime lord
2 Become fat eating rodents
3 Build a secret palace
4 Build a sky ship to the moon
5 Commune with lost cat gods
6 Fame as a slayer of monsters
7 Found a catnip distillery
8 Infamy as a supreme gambler
9 Inhabit Hoarblight Keep
10 Live in exorbitant luxury
11 Marry into human nobility
12 Steal the duke’s jewels
BELIEFS
d12 Beliefs
1 Catnip is poison to humans
2 Consume mouse-flesh daily
3 Dreams are the true reality
4 Evil rat realm underground
5 Human nobles serve Catland
6 Magic is fading
7 Only eat raw meat
8 The Cold Prince is long dead
9 The moon is ruled by mice
10 The Nag-Lord adores cats
11 Vegetables harm the health
12 War is brewing in Fairy

=== PAGE 46 ===
44
P a r t t h r e e | K i n D r e D S
Human
The folk of the day-to-day world, in all the variety we know.The folk of the day-to-day world, in all the variety we know.
Kindred Type Mortal
Level 1 PC Age 15 + 2d10 years
Lifespan 50 + 2d20 years
Height Male: 5′4″ + 2d6″ (Medium)
Female: 5′ + 2d6″ (Medium)
Weight 120 + 6d10 lbs
Native Languages Woldish
A
s is the way in the wider world beyond the forest,
humans prevail within the settled reaches of
Dolmenwood. Possessed of a restless and curious
spirit, humans venture into unexplored regions, found
great dominions, and delve into perilous secrets of magic.
Hamlets, Towns, and Cities
Human settlements are found throughout Dolmenwood,
from the isolated hamlets of hunters and woodcutters,
to welcoming wayside inns, to trade villages and market
towns, to the great city of Castle Brackenwold.
Folklore and Faith
While most everyday humans in Dolmenwood are adher-
ents of the Pluritine Church (p178), whispers of the worship
of the old gods live on in folklore. The local belief in mead
and ale as a means of communion with greater powers
hearkens back to worship of the Green Man—god of feast,
ale, revelry, and hunting. Indeed, the Green Man’s leaf-
ringed visage can still be spied on old buildings and grave-
stones throughout Dolmenwood. See Gwyrae, p179.
Humans of Many Kinds
In the wide expanse of the mortal world, humans are the
most populous Kindred, spread throughout many cultures
and lands. Merchants and wanderers travel far and wide,
bringing trade and rumour to Dolmenwood from distant
cultures.
Intermarriage With Breggles
Humans and breggles occasionally marry and have chil-
dren. See Intermarriage With Humans, p32.
Affairs With Elves
Wandering elves occasionally tryst with humans, some-
times conceiving children. See Affairs With Humans,
p36.
KINDRED RELATIONS
Humans are on friendly terms with mortal and demi-fey
Kindreds and live alongside breggles in the High Wold
region. Most non-adventuring humans have never met
a fairy and regard them with awe and caution. Human
folklore is rife with tales of the treachery and mischief of
fairies, not least the wicked Cold Prince and his servants,
who ruled Dolmenwood in ancient times.
NAMES
The names listed are typical of the everyday folk in
Dolmenwood and its surrounds. Such common names
are not used by nobility or perilous folk such as the Drune.
Naming a character: Either choose a first name and
surname from the table below, roll for each, or invent
something in a similar vein.
HUMAN NAMES
d20 Male Female Unisex Surname
1 Arfred Agnel Andred Addercapper
2 Brom Amonie Arda Burl
3 Bunk Celenia Aubrey Candleswick
4 Chydewick Emelda Clement Crumwaller
5 Crump Gertwinne Clewyd Dogoode
6 Dimothy Gilly Dayle Dregger
7 Guillem Gretchen Gemrand Dunwallow
8 Henrick Gwendolyne Hank Fraggleton
9 Hogrid Hilda Lyren Gruewater
10 Jappser Illabell Maude Harper
11 Joremey Katerynne Megynne Lank
12 Josprey Lillibeth Moss Logueweave
13 Jymes Lillith Robyn Loomer
14 Mollequip Lisabeth Rowan Malksmilk
15 Rodger Mabel Sage Smith
16 Rogbert Maydrid Tamrin Sunderman
17 Samwise Melysse Ursequine Swinney
18 Shadwell Molly Waldra Tolmen
19 Shank Pansy Waydred Weavilman
20 Sidley Roese Wendlow Wolder
EXTRA DETAILS
The tables on the following pages may be used to add extra
details to human Player Characters. Roll on as many of
these tables as desired, or use them as inspiration for craft-
ing additional character details.

=== PAGE 47 ===
P a r t t h r e e | K i n D r e D S
45
CHOOSING A CLASS
Humans are commonly found in all Classes except
enchanter. Rare is the human with enough connection to
Fairy to become an enchanter.
DECISIVENESS
When an Initiative Roll is tied, humans act first, as if they
had won initiative. Treat humans as a separate side, acting
before others. See Initiative, p165.
LEADERSHIP
The Loyalty rating of retainers in the employ of a human
character is increased by 1. See Retainers, p134.
SPIRITED
Humans are quick to learn and adapt and gain a +10%
bonus to all Experience Points earned. This is in addition to
any XP bonus due to the character’s Prime Ability (p22).
For example, a human with a Prime Ability of 15 gains a
total 15% XP bonus—5% for the Prime Ability and 10% for
their Kindred.

=== PAGE 48 ===
46
P a r t t h r e e | K i n D r e D S
HUMAN BACKGROUNDS
d100 Background d100 Background d100 Background
01 Actor 38 Fortune-teller 67 Scribe
02–05 Angler 39 Fur trapper 68–71 Servant
06 Animal trainer 40–41 Gambler 72–73 Sheep farmer
07 Apothecary 42 Glassblower 74 Shipwright
08–10 Baker 43 Grave digger 75 Smuggler
11 Barber 44–45 Hog farmer 76 Stable hand
12 Beekeeper 46–49 Hunter 77 Stonemason
13–15 Beggar 50 Jester 78 Swindler
16–18 Blacksmith 51 Jeweller 79 Tailor
19 Bookbinder 52 Leather worker 80 Tax collector
20–21 Brewer 53 Locksmith 81 Thatcher
22–24 Butcher 54 Merchant 82–84 Turnip farmer
25–28 Carpenter 55–56 Miner 85 Unicorn hunter
29 Cartographer 57–58 Outlaw 86–87 Vagrant
30–32 Cattle farmer 59–60 Pedlar 88 Wainwright
33 Chandler 61 Pilgrim 89–90 Wayfarer
34 Cheesemaker 62–63 Poacher 91–92 Weaver
35 Cobbler 64 Potter 93–95 Wheat farmer
36 Cooper 65 Roper 96 Wizard’s assistant
37 Dockhand 66 Sailor 97–00 Woodcutter
Encumbrance: Small trinkets weigh 10 coins. The Referee
should judge the weight of larger items.
HUMAN TRINKETS
d100 Trinket
01–02 A black stone which always points towards the sun.
03–04 A blood sausage, allegedly made of wyrm’s blood.
05–06 A blood-stained handkerchief that won’t wash clean.
07–08 A bone statuette of a mermaid with prodigiously
hairy armpits.
09–10 A bright red egg that was given to you by a sprite.
11–12 A clay effigy that whispers to you in your sleep.
13–14 A cracked marble that falls in slow motion.
15–16 A deck of cards illustrated with blindfolded kings,
queens, knaves, etc.
17–18 A drinking horn carved with cavorting nymphs.
19–20 A dubious fake moustache made of rat fur.
21–22 A fine set of silver cutlery and a floral china tea-set, all
packed in a wicker hamper.
23–24 A foot-long, spicy sausage.
25–26 A gauntlet of wyrm scales.
27–28 A goatskin pouch full of giblets.
29–30 A head-sized glass sphere with a neck opening.
31–32 A hunk of ancient, mouldy cheese.
33–34 A jar that breeds flies, even when tightly sealed.
35–36 A jaunty cap (with a feather stuck in it) which jumps
up whenever anyone says your name.
37–38 A lavender scented cushion embroidered with black
roses and thorns.
39–40 A lock of hair from the first person you killed.
41–42 A long kilt of woven moss.
43–44 A love letter you are penning in silver ink to your
fairy betrothed. (To be placed within a ring of toad-
stools for delivery.)
45–46 A miniature brass gnome. (Appears on your pillow
looking at you each morning.)
47–48 A napkin and cutlery that you stole from a fancy inn.
49–50 A note from your mother admonishing you to return
home as soon as able.
d100 Trinket
51–52 A pair of stripy woollen socks that keep your feet as
warm and dry as if you were wearing fine boots.
53–54 A pebble that glows faintly in the dark.
55–56 A piece of the moon that fell to earth. (Or is it a hunk
of desiccated cheese?)
57–58 A porcelain teapot painted with a scene of owls
devouring humans.
59–60 A raven’s feather quill that writes without ink.
61–62 A silver belt woven from the mane of a kelpie.
63–64 A silver mirror that always reflects the sky.
65–66 A silver ring that shrinks or expands to fit whatever
finger it is placed upon.
67–68 A tiny fish in a jar of water. At night, it comes to the
surface and whispers the names of everyone within 5′.
69–70 A tiny wicker effigy that you stole from a witch’s hut.
71–72 A unicorn statuette carved out of mushroom-wood.
73–74 A wanted poster for yourself.
75–76 A well-thumbed and annotated book of psalms.
77–78 An ash wand stained with the blood of a troll.
79–80 An enormous Green Man brass belt buckle.
81–82 An ornate lantern you found in a bog.
83–84 Sixteen silver pieces, greased with slippery magical
oil that cannot be washed off.
85–86 The broken tip of a unicorn’s horn.
87–88 The fairy sword that slew your father.
89–90 The mummified hand of a bog body.
91–92 The scintillating, silvery feather of a witch owl.
93–94 The skeleton of an especially large toad, in pieces.
95–96 The skull of a Drune, stolen from a forbidden crypt.
97–98 The wobbly, pink severed hand of a gelatinous ape,
still fresh and sweet.
99–00 Your grandfather’s beard, rolled up in a hessian cloth.

=== PAGE 49 ===
P a r t t h r e e | K i n D r e D S
47
HEAD
d12 Head
1 Cropped or shaven hair
2 Embroidered skull cap
3 Fur hat with animal tail
4 Jaunty cap with feather
5 Jug ears
6 Long braids
7 Meticulously oiled hair
8 Misshapen skull
9 Patchy, straggly hair
10 Poised atop an elegant neck
11 Thick, lustrous hair
12 Wild, curly hair
FACE
d12 Face
1 Bent nose
2 Button nose
3 Darting eyes
4 Droll, lupine mouth
5 Gap-toothed
6 Hirsute
7 Large, regal nose
8 Narrow, pinched
9 Pimples
10 Prominent scar
11 Rosy
12 Wide, spaced out features
BODY
d12 Body
1 Barrel chest
2 Big hands
3 Blotchy skin
4 Excessively hairy
5 Freckles
6 Long legs
7 Long, elegant fingers
8 Oily skin
9 Pocked with plague-scars
10 Pot belly
11 Smooth, supple skin
12 Warts
SPEECH
d12 Speech
1 Agitated
2 Bellowing
3 Cackling
4 Coarse
5 Conspiratorial
6 Gravelly
7 Inane banter
8 Mellow
9 Mumbling
10 Nasal whine
11 Rapid
12 Sighing
DEMEANOUR
d12 Demeanour
1 Brooding, quick-tempered
2 Curious, broad-minded
3 Dour, single-minded
4 Enthusiastic, gullible
5 Gregarious
6 Impatient and rash
7 Kindly
8 Miserly
9 Scheming
10 Self-aggrandising
11 Slovenly
12 Suave
DRESS
d12 Dress
1 Colourful patchwork
2 Dashing doublet and hose
3 Enigmatic cloak and hood
4 Filthy woollens
5 Hessian rags
6 Lace, posies, and frills
7 Noisome furs
8 Padded vest and breeches
9 Sheepskin coat
10 Smoking jacket and slacks
11 Sturdy boots and raincoat
12 Way-worn leathers
DESIRES
d12 Desires
1 Build castle and new village
2 Clear family name
3 Collect saintly relics
4 Domestic bliss
5 Explore Fairy
6 Found business empire
7 Infamy
8 Map stones of Dolmenwood
9 Marry into nobility
10 Redeem past misdeeds
11 Secret underground lair
12 Squander fortune on luxury
BELIEFS
d12 Beliefs
1 Bishop is a werewolf
2 Drune will enslave the duke
3 Fairies steal human souls
4 Nag-Lord brings final doom
5 One parent was an elf
6 Prayers redeem evil deeds
7 Shroom of immortality
8 Sunken village in Longmere
9 Talking beasts plot uprising
10 The dead are rising
11 Visions from the Cold Prince
12 Witches serve the Nag-Lord

=== PAGE 50 ===
48
P a r t t h r e e | K i n D r e D S
Mossling
Gnarled, woody humanoids whose fertile flesh hosts mosses, moulds, and fungi.Gnarled, woody humanoids whose fertile flesh hosts mosses, moulds, and fungi.
Kindred Type Mortal
Level 1 PC Age 50 + 3d6 years
Lifespan 200 + 5d8 × 10 years
Height 3′6″ + 2d6″ (Small)
Weight 150 + 2d20 lbs
Native Languages Woldish, Mulch
M
osslings are an obscure, stunted folk native
to Dolmenwood, with an affinity for the dank
plants and moulds of the deep woods. They are
of stocky, pudgy build, with green, yellow, or brown skin,
textured like wrinkled bark and patched with mould,
lichen, fungus, and creeping plants. Their hair and beards
are green or black and plant-like, akin to moss, ferns, or
tangled roots. If injured, mosslings ooze white, sap-like
blood.
Ageing, Death, and Composting
Mosslings become wiser and more plant-like as they
age. After death, even their bones rot away to mould: a
mossling’s body decays to a rich compost within a year.
Dank Forest Burrows
The natural habitat of mosslings is dark, dank forests,
where they gather in small, isolated communities. They
are, above all, burrowers, delving their homes into the
damp earth of the Wood or inhabiting natural caves where
they are found.
Worship Gods of Moss and Fungus
As subjects of the Duke of Brackenwold, mosslings are
nominally adherents of the Pluritine Church. However, in
practice they worship their own gods of the deep forest and
the fecund underworld—see Mogba, p179.
KINDRED RELATIONS
Mosslings are on friendly terms with mortal and demi-fey
Kindreds. While most non-adventuring mosslings have
never met a fairy, they tend to treat fairies with curiosity
as wanderers from afar with tales to share.
Mosslings are welcomed in human settlements in Dolmen-
wood, where they sometimes travel to sell mushrooms, ale,
or cheese at a market.
NAMES
Among their own folk, mosslings tend not to use surnames.
If pressed by folk of other Kindreds, they usually adopt a
mélange of Woldish words associated with their culture.
Naming a character: Either choose a first name and
surname from the table below, roll for each, or invent
something in a similar vein.
MOSSLING NAMES
d20 Male Female Unisex Surname
1 Dombo Bilibom Bendiom Barkhop
2 Gobd Brimbul Blobul Conker
3 Gobulom Ebbli Ebdwol Danklow
4 Golobd Ghibli Glob Fernhead
5 Gremo Gobbli Gombly Frother
6 Gwomotom Gwedim Greblim Grimehump
7 Hollogowl Higwold Gwoodwom Hogscap
8 Kabob Ibulold Hollb Mossbeard
9 Kollobom Imbwi Klolb Mossfurrow
10 Limbly Klibli Kwolotomb Mould
11 Loblow Klimbim Lambop Mouldfinger
12 Mobdemold Libib Morromb Mudfoot
13 Nyoma Limimb Mwoomb Mugfoam
14 Obolm Marib Olob Mulchwump
15 Oglom Milik Oobl Mushrump
16 Omb Shlirimi Shlurbel Oddpolyp
17 Shmold Shobd Smodron Puffhelm
18 Slumbred Skimbim Tomdown Smallcheese
19 Umbertop Slimpk Tomumbolo Sodwallow
20 Wobobold Smodri Worrib Twiggler
EXTRA DETAILS
The tables on the following pages may be used to add extra
details to mossling Player Characters. Roll on as many of
these tables as desired, or use them as inspiration for craft-
ing additional character details.

=== PAGE 51 ===
P a r t t h r e e | K i n D r e D S
49
CHOOSING A CLASS
Mossling adventurers are commonly fighters and hunt-
ers. They are only occasionally accepted into the ranks of
Dolmenwood nobility as knights, seldom seek member-
ship of the Pluritine Church as clerics or friars, and rarely
possess enough connection with Fairy to become enchant-
ers.
ARMOUR AND WEAPONS
Armour must be tailored to mosslings’ small size. Like-
wise, mosslings cannot wield Large weapons (see p118).
Mosslings prefer non-metal armour, and manufacture
special suits of armour from hardened bark and pinecones.
Rolled armour: If a player rolls chainmail when creating a
mossling character, it should be replaced with bark armour.
Plate mail should be replaced with pinecone armour.
KNACKS
Mosslings practice carefully guarded, quasi-magical crafts
known as knacks. Each mossling knows one knack, rolled or
chosen at character creation. See Mossling Knacks, p112.
MOSSLING SKILLS
Mosslings have a Skill Target of 5 for Survival when forag-
ing.
RESILIENCE
Mosslings are hardy and resilient like the gnarled bole of
an old tree. They gain a +4 bonus to Saving Throws against
fungal spores or poisons and a +2 to bonus to all other
Saving Throws.
SYMBIOTIC FLESH
As a mossling ages, their dank, fertile flesh picks up seeds
and spores which germinate into symbiotic plants and
fungi. At each Level (including Level 1), the character
acquires a random trait from the Symbiotic Flesh table.
Duplicates may be re-rolled or taken to indicate an ampli-
fication of the trait.
SYMBIOTIC FLESH
d20 Infestation
1 Outer parts of ears replaced by jelly fungus.
2 Patches of lichen.
3 Dainty flowers bloom in the beard in springtime.
4 Yeast infections in moist places.
5 Toadstools growing from joints.
6 Covered in slimy, green jelly.
7 Miniature tree growing from ear.
8 Skin riddled with mycelia.
9 Eyes fur over with transparent, yellow mould.
10 Edible toe cheese.
11 Growths of woody, bracket fungus in the armpits.
12 Mossy feet.
13 Climbing vines wrapped around limbs and torso.
14 Radical fern growth around groin.
15 Mossy biceps.
16 Puffball growths around the buttocks and knees.
17 Parsley chest hair.
18 Blackberry brambles tangled in the hair.
19 Edible mushrooms growing in hair.
20 Semi-sentient mushroom growing from top of head.

=== PAGE 52 ===
50
P a r t t h r e e | K i n D r e D S
MOSSLING BACKGROUNDS
d20 Background d20 Background
1 Bark tailor 11 Night forager
2 Boar hunter 12 Oracle’s apprentice
3 Cheesemaker 13 Pipe maker
4 Compost raker 14 Sausage maker
5 Fungologist 15 Squirrel trainer
6 Fungus farmer 16 Swineherd
7 Gambler 17 Tavernkeep
8 Horn blower 18 Vagrant
9 Moss brewer 19 Worm farmer
10 Moss farmer 20 Yeast farmer
Encumbrance: Small trinkets weigh 10 coins. The Referee
should judge the weight of larger items.
MOSSLING TRINKETS
d100 Trinket
01–02 A bag of stone marbles. Each has a name and rolls
towards whoever speaks it.
03–04 A block of cheese infected with hallucinogenic fungus.
05–06 A bloodstained hat that once belonged to a redcap.
07–08 A book alleging crimes by each of the 100 saints of
Dolmenwood. Found on the body of a murdered man.
09–10 A bottle of yeast-froth shampoo, essential for main-
taining the lustre of mossy manes.
11–12 A bouquet of honeysuckle that drips real honey. The
honey attracts wasps.
13–14 A brass cowbell. When struck, nearby milk and
cheese products jump half a foot towards it.
15–16 A broad-brimmed hat covered in shimmering moss.
17–18 A bronze idol to a two-headed mushroom god.
19–20 A chunk of volcanic rock, warm to the touch. A single
Old Woldish rune has been carved into it.
21–22 A clay figurine of a pot-bellied giant with a single eye.
23–24 A cluster of fungus consisting of a dozen different
kinds of mushrooms living in symbiosis.
25–26 A collection of small rocks, all chipped from different
gravestones.
27–28 A cooking pot that adds mushrooms to every dish
cooked inside it.
29–30 A flower pressed inside a dead man’s journal.
31–32 A hunting horn fashioned from a great boar tusk.
33–34 A jar of blue cheese massage oil.
35–36 A jar of green jelly with the label “Don’t Eat Me.”
37–38 A large egg, entrusted to you by a panicked woodgrue.
39–40 A large gooseberry that appears to have a creature
growing inside it.
41–42 A large, pink sausage. Tries to crawl away if left unat-
tended.
43–44 A leaf that changes with the seasons, dying by winter
only to rejuvenate in spring.
45–46 A mossy rock. When placed on the ground for at least
a minute and then lifted, bugs scurry out from under-
neath it.
47–48 A mould-riddled tapestry depicting the hunt for a
swine of mythic size.
49–50 A puffball with dozens of tiny mouths which burp in
unison at dawn.
51–52 A puffball-skin pouch filled with jelly.
53–54 A sack of half-empty ale bottles.
d100 Trinket
55–56 A sealed bottle of spirits, brewed from the composted
remains of one of your ancestors.
57–58 A shepherd’s crook that induces fear in farm animals
when brandished.
59–60 A single hair from the head of an elven lady; a token
of her affection.
61–62 A small beetle you found on the road. You have since
received a letter from an angry grimalkin charging
you with its theft.
63–64 A small effigy of a breggle made from dried mush-
room flesh.
65–66 A small pouch of magic nuts. When a nut is broken
open, it emits a pearl of wisdom.
67–68 A small snake with a “Return to” note attached. The
owner’s name is smudged out.
69–70 A small, hollow toadstool with a tiny wooden door.
71–72 A snail shell that grows a new snail at dawn if the old
one is removed or killed.
73–74 A squirrel-sized collar and leash.
75–76 A story book about the charming exploits of the
rat-people of the moon.
77–78 A unique pipeweed mix of your own invention. A bit
too combustible.
79–80 A watering can that constantly trickles water from its
spout.
81–82 A waterskin of yellow slime that drips upwards when
unstoppered.
83–84 A wheel of cheese that never loses momentum once it
starts rolling.
85–86 A wooden carving of yourself that ages as you do.
87–88 A wooden peg leg that you found and converted into
an incubator for rare fungi.
89–90 A worm whose squirming slowly spells out threaten-
ing prophecies.
91–92 An adorable red-and-white button mushroom. Whis-
pers to you when no one else is listening.
93–94 An incomplete, and possibly inaccurate, map of all
the inns in Dolmenwood.
95–96 An onion shaped like a baby.
97–98 Blueprints for a marvellous mechanical mouse organ
clock.
99–00 Dozens of different kinds of bark, stitched together
like a book.

=== PAGE 53 ===
P a r t t h r e e | K i n D r e D S
51
HEAD
d12 Head
1 Bald like a polished nut
2 Buzzing with flies
3 Floppy hat droops over eyes
4 Fuzzy green hair
5 Huge floppy ears
6 Long greasy hair
7 Much too big
8 No neck
9 Patchy orange hair
10 Pointy felt hat
11 Wobbly
12 Wrinkled like a walnut
FACE
d12 Face
1 Beard of frothy yeast
2 Darting tongue
3 Eyes as big as fists
4 Eyes like pools of deep space
5 Eyes like tiny black marbles
6 Long, floppy nose
7 Looks like a carved potato
8 Massive flared nostrils
9 Mouth foaming with yeast
10 Nostrils ooze purple slime
11 Pointy root nose
12 Wobbly lips
BODY
d12 Body
1 Blubbery
2 Covered in downy fur
3 Flabby rolls
4 Lumpy
5 Rampant belly button fur
6 Spherical
7 Stubby legs
8 Stumpy arms
9 Whorled like knotted wood
10 Wider than tall
11 Wobbly paunch
12 Wrinkled folds of skin
SPEECH
d12 Speech
1 Baritone
2 Filthy
3 Grumbling
4 Meandering
5 Mumbling
6 Muttering
7 Obtuse
8 Phlegmy
9 Squeaking
10 Squelchy
11 Stammering
12 Wheezy
DEMEANOUR
d12 Demeanour
1 Blustery
2 Brooding
3 Cowardly
4 Dozy
5 Flustered
6 Grumpy
7 Impertinent
8 Lethargic
9 Miserly
10 Overbearingly affable
11 Shrewd
12 Tells terrible jokes
DRESS
d12 Dress
1 Brushed felt
2 Cosy knitwear
3 Dapper tweed
4 Greasy leathers
5 Grubby rags
6 Knitted ivy
7 Loincloth
8 Naturist
9 Pelts
10 Pig suede
11 Scratchy wool
12 Woven fungus stems
DESIRES
d12 Desires
1 A dozen spouses
2 Acquire moon cheese
3 Become a fungus giant
4 Breed a sentient swine
5 Brew the universal elixir
6 Consume sentient fungi
7 Found a moss brewery
8 Found underground realm
9 Grow clones of self
10 Meld with the fungal mind
11 Own a sprawling inn
12 Sample all known ales
BELIEFS
d12 Beliefs
1 Ale is essential for life
2 Bathing is inimical to health
3 Daily sacrifice to the elders
4 Gets visions from the moon
5 Humans are naked monkeys
6 Pursued by vengeful ghosts
7 Stone circles hide buried gold
8 Talking owls are plotting
9 The Drune will conquer all
10 The duke is secretly a fairy
11 The fungal mind is supreme
12 The trees have eyes

=== PAGE 54 ===
52
P a r t t h r e e | K i n D r e D S
Woodgrue
Bat-faced demi-fey goblins, known for their love of music, revelry, and arson.Bat-faced demi-fey goblins, known for their love of music, revelry, and arson.
Kindred Type Demi-fey
Level 1 PC Age 50 + 3d6 years
Lifespan 300 + 2d100 years
Height 3′ + 2d6″ (Small)
Weight 60 + 2d10 lbs
Native Languages Woldish, Sylvan
W
oodgrues are capricious, bat-faced goblins who,
many generations ago, forsook their ancestral
home in Fairy and migrated to the musty dells
of the mortal world. They have massive, flapping ears and
soft, downy fur upon their heads and chests, while the rest
of their body appears like that of a human child.
Woodland Wanderers
Woodgrues live a nomadic lifestyle, wandering Dolmen-
wood alone or in small groups, following where their
whims and noses lead. They are happy to camp in the wild,
erecting miniature shelters high in trees, but also enjoy the
comforts of human settlements.
Enchanted Songs
Woodgrues love wild dancing and cacophonous music—
primarily crazed nighttime warbling played on pipes.
The magic of Fairy lingers in the music of woodgrues, for
their songs can lure folk into the deep woods and enchant
them to frolic. Woodgrues delight in using this magic for
mischief and high jinks. While mischievous and rascally,
woodgrues only cause serious harm if slighted.
Seasonal Moots
Several times a year (the exact timing varies), a woodgrue
elder calls a moot. The invitation arrives through the night
air via a cacophony of hoots and pipes, announcing the
festivities at an appointed place and time. Moots typically
last for five days and are attended by up to two hundred
woodgrues, dancing, celebrating, and sharing news.
KINDRED RELATIONS
Woodgrues enjoy the company of all Kindreds, mortal,
fairy, or demi-fey, though they favour those who share
their raucous sense of humour.
In human settlements in Dolmenwood, woodgrues may be
met with caution, as folk are aware of their rambunctious
nature. However, it is known that barring woodgrues entry
would likely only lead to greater misfortune.
NAMES
Naming a character: Either choose a first name and
surname from the table below, roll for each, or invent
something in a similar vein.
WOODGRUE NAMES
d20 Male Female Unisex Surname
1 Bagnack Bishga Bogfrink Bobbleslime
2 Barmcudgel Canaghoop Bongwretch Bogbabble
3 Bloomfext Cheruffue Chunder Bootswap
4 Bunglebone Doola Danklob Chumley
5 Capratt Frogfyrr Frondbong Cobwallop
6 Chimm Gruecalle Gobblebag Drooglight
7 Delgodand Hoolbootes Hootbra Dungobble
8 Drunker Maulspoorer Longsnipe Eggmumble
9 Eortban Mogsmote Lumpfrisk Hogslapper
10 Grunkle Molemoch Mabmungle Hortleswoop
11 Gubber Moonmilk Mungus Hungerslip
12 Gumroot Munmun Obblehob Lankwobble
13 Gunkuss Nettaclare Oddler Moorsnob
14 Kungus Oorcha Oodler Mundersnog
15 Longtittle Palliepalm Pipplepoke Pencecrump
16 Lubbal Pimplepook Slovend Persnickle
17 Olpipes Puggump Umple Shunderbog
18 Runkelgate Rolliepolk Unclord Snodgrass
19 Weepooze Sasserpipe Undermap Wallerbog
20 Wumpus Whipsee Whoopla Woodfuffle
EXTRA DETAILS
The tables on the following pages may be used to add extra
details to woodgrue Player Characters. Roll on as many
of these tables as desired, or use them as inspiration for
crafting additional character details.

=== PAGE 55 ===
P a r t t h r e e | K i n D r e D S
53
CHOOSING A CLASS
Woodgrue adventurers are commonly bards, magicians,
or thieves. It is rare for a woodgrue to be accepted into the
ranks of Dolmenwood nobility as a knight. Woodgrues
cannot be clerics or friars as they have no spiritual connec-
tion with the deities of mortals.
ARMOUR AND WEAPONS
Armour must be tailored to woodgrues’ small size. Like-
wise, woodgrues cannot wield Large weapons (see p118).
COMPULSIVE JUBILATION
A woodgrue who witnesses a party, feast, celebration, or
festival must partake; they are utterly compelled with
every fibre of their being. If, for some reason, a woodgrue
wishes to resist this compulsion, they may Save Versus
Spell (but feel drained and downtrodden for the length of
the engagement).
DEFENSIVE BONUS
In melee with Large creatures, woodgrues gain a +2 Armour
Class bonus, due to their small size.
MAD REVELRY
Once per day, a woodgrue may play one of the enchanted
melodies listed below on a wind instrument while hooting
and dancing terribly.
Subjects: All living creatures within 30′ (including allies)
must Save Versus Spell or be afflicted by the melody. Fair-
ies and demi-fey gain a +2 bonus to the Saving Throw.
Duration: The effects of the melody last as long as the
woodgrue keeps playing. While playing, the woodgrue
may move but cannot attack or perform other actions.
Disrupting: If the woodgrue is harmed or fails a Saving
Throw, they stop playing. Subjects who are harmed or fail
a Saving Throw likewise cease to be affected.
Enchanted Melodies
Confide: Subjects speak in a slurred voice, confessing some
deeply hidden emotion or revealing an ally’s secret.
Dance: Subjects begin dancing a profane, nonsensical jig.
Those affected gain a +1 bonus to Armour Class, but cannot
move from the spot where they dance.
Imbibe: Subjects ravenously consume any liquids (potable
or not), herbs, mushrooms, and such like that are available
and proceed to act as though drunk, suffering a –2 penalty
to Attack Rolls until the revelry ends.
Jape: Subjects mock the immediately preceding occur-
rence, be it a deed of words or acts.
Jubilate: Subjects burst into irrepressible laughter, prevent-
ing them from speech. There is a 1-in-6 chance each Round
of falling over in a laughing fit.
Mount: Subjects attempt to mount nearby creatures, be
they friend or foe, and ride them piggyback (Save Versus
Hold to resist being mounted). Unaffected creatures may
Save Versus Hold once per Round to buck off a rider.
Revel: Subjects cannot speak; instead they bark out terrible
scats of sound, in an attempt to keep up with the wood-
grue’s maddening melodies. Speed is halved if subjects are
not headed in the direction of the woodgrue.
MOON SIGHT
A woodgrue can see in darkness up to 60′, viewing the
world as though it glows in faint moonlight. This does
not incur low light penalties (p150), but fine detail (e.g.
writing) cannot be perceived.
MUSICAL INSTRUMENTS
A woodgrue can employ a musical instrument as a melee
weapon, doing 1d4 damage.
STARTING EQUIPMENT
Woodgrues begin play with a wind instrument.
VULNERABLE TO COLD IRON
As demi-fey, cold iron weapons inflict +1 damage on wood-
grues. (e.g. a cold iron shortsword would inflict 1d6+1
damage on a woodgrue, rather than the standard 1d6).
WOODGRUE SKILLS
Woodgrues have a Skill Target of 5 for Listen.

=== PAGE 56 ===
54
P a r t t h r e e | K i n D r e D S
WOODGRUE BACKGROUNDS
d20 Background d20 Background
1 Circus performer 11 Maggot farmer
2 Convicted arsonist 12 Mead brewer
3 Court jester 13 Moth trapper
4 Crow hunter 14 Mushroom forager
5 Dung collector 15 Pedlar
6 Egg thief 16 Pipe carver
7 Errant piper 17 Ragpicker
8 Firework maker 18 Tent maker
9 Fungus trader 19 Tomb robber
10 Juggler 20 Wizard’s servant
WOODGRUE TRINKETS
d100 Trinket
01–02 A bag of delicious boiled sweets.
03–04 A basket of snakes, intended for juggling.
05–06 A battered hat with a stuffed swan’s head stitched
proudly at the summit.
07–08 A bone whistle. When blown at night, it sends nearby
bats and night birds into a frenzy.
09–10 A bottle containing dirty water from the Baths of
Astralon.
11–12 A bottle of ink that always seems to spill everywhere
when opened.
13–14 A bronze statuette of a chimera made up of a dozen
different animals. The person who gave it to you
insists it depicts a real creature.
15–16 A burial shroud seemingly imprinted with a face. The
face becomes more distinguishable every day.
17–18 A ceramic plate that emits a simple tune when
scratched.
19–20 A collection of fungi, loaned to you by a mossling.
21–22 A dead crow in a bag. Before you killed it, you were
pretty sure it was spying on you.
23–24 A fake moustache. When worn, you appear to have a
full beard.
25–26 A forbidden treatise claiming grimalkins and wood-
grues share the same ancestors.
27–28 A glass case with a giant moth pinned inside.
29–30 A harp shaped like a duck. Playing it attracts the
attention of nearby waterfowl.
31–32 A harp string, sharp and tinged with blood.
33–34 A hooded cloak made from thousands of moth wings
stitched together.
35–36 A mead tankard that is perpetually sticky.
37–38 A misshapen ocarina. Each note sounds eerily similar
to a baby’s cries.
39–40 A mossling pipe you found in a pile of compost. Its
smoke makes people nostalgic.
41–42 A note promising that a “Mr Fox” will come to your
aid in your hour of greatest need.
43–44 A pair of matching eyeballs. Whenever possible, they
rotate to stare at you.
45–46 A pair of small, bronze cymbals.
47–48 A personalised invitation to “THE FEAST.” No further
details are provided.
d100 Trinket
49–50 A pocketbook of bad jokes. Emits the occasional
snicker.
51–52 A poster for your parent’s last, ill-fated circus perfor-
mance.
53–54 A quill made from a stirge-owl feather.
55–56 A rope woven from a mix of human and breggle hair.
57–58 A stack of angry letters, all accusing you of arson.
59–60 A strange disk that produces the sound of flatulence
whenever a weight is placed atop it.
61–62 A tent that slowly raises itself when you loudly sing it
a jaunty song.
63–64 A vial of guano. Your last reminder of a deceased
loved one.
65–66 A wooden sceptre topped with a jester’s head. When
struck, the head tells an ill-considered joke.
67–68 An advice book that ultimately suggests a liberal
application of fire as the solution to every problem.
69–70 An ancient coin, stolen from a grave. Far colder to the
touch than it should be.
71–72 An empty pan flute case, its contents stolen.
73–74 An enormous firework with a tag that reads
“Untested.”
75–76 An extravagant wig, stolen from the head of an elf
noble.
77–78 An ordinary-looking metal bucket. When filled with
water, leeches appear inside.
79–80 An ornate flute, said to be handed down by your
ancestors since before they left Fairy.
81–82 An unhatched egg that sweats blood.
83–84 Faded parchment that lists the names of everyone
you’ve ever wronged. It updates itself periodically.
85–86 Light from a fireworks display, caught in a shard of
glass.
87–88 Lyrics to a half-written song about rodents visiting
from the moon.
89–90 Small vials of syrups, each labelled with the type of
mood they’re supposed to cure.
91–92 The corpse of a mouse, dressed in tiny clothes.
93–94 The crest of an unknown longhorn noble house,
found on a dead breggle.
95–96 The squirming pieces for maggot chess.
97–98 Woollen ear warmers, knitted by your grandmother.
99–00 Your uncle’s famed recipe for moth cakes.
Encumbrance: Small trinkets weigh 10 coins. The Referee
should judge the weight of larger items.

=== PAGE 57 ===
P a r t t h r e e | K i n D r e D S
55
HEAD
d12 Head
1 Bald, veiny ears
2 Blotchy bald pate
3 Cap of shiny beetle shells
4 Ears ooze orange wax
5 Elongated, teetering neck
6 Felt hat with long liripipe
7 Floppy hat, way too big
8 Long, bristling hair tufts
9 Pink mohawk (natural)
10 Round, droopy ears
11 Stripe of silver hair
12 Twitching, pointy ears
FACE
d12 Face
1 Droopy nose
2 Lavishly preened moustache
3 Lustrous black beard
4 Nose flesh changes colour
5 Nostrils flap when excited
6 Nostrils dripping yellow snot
7 Oiled moustache
8 One large eye, one small
9 Protruding fangs
10 Sagging, bloated throat
11 Shifty eyes constantly blink
12 Straggly beard
BODY
d12 Body
1 Flaps of skin between fingers
2 Hunchback
3 Knock-kneed
4 Pink skin with white fuzz
5 Prehensile feet
6 Rotund
7 Scrawny
8 Skin flaps under arms
9 Spindly, 4-knuckled fingers
10 Thick, matted, auburn fur
11 Utterly hairless
12 Vestigial wings (flightless)
SPEECH
d12 Speech
1 Childish giggling
2 Excited screeching
3 Guffawing
4 Hesitant warbling
5 Hissing and slurping
6 Intermittent gibbering
7 Languid rumbling
8 Melodious
9 Punctuated with hoots
10 Shrill
11 Sinister whispering
12 Staccato
DEMEANOUR
d12 Demeanour
1 Bends the truth
2 Capers and japes
3 Childlike and curious
4 Cunning, scheming
5 Dour, gallows humour
6 Feigned mysticism
7 Frivolous and petty
8 Penchant for pilfery
9 Practical joker
10 Shady and unscrupulous
11 Trickster (but loyal friend)
12 Wide-eyed innocence
DRESS
d12 Dress
1 Dangling bells and baubles
2 Enigmatic black cloak
3 Heavily patched
4 Hessian loin cloth
5 Knotted cords
6 Long, ragged cape
7 Mismatched, stolen clothes
8 Paint-daubed rags
9 Pied jester’s outfit
10 Soft brushed suede
11 Stockings and baggy jumper
12 Stripy hose and bodice
DESIRES
d12 Desires
1 Be accepted as a saint (as a joke)
2 Build manor half in Fairy
3 Burn down a castle
4 Found a secret society
5 Giant bee mead brewery
6 Live in a castle of bats
7 Marry a goblin merchant
8 Organise largest moot ever
9 Perform for the Nag-Lord
10 Popularise moth sausages
11 Rule a human town in secret
12 Steal secrets of the Drune
BELIEFS
d12 Beliefs
1 Crows are spies from Fairy
2 Fairies are illusory
3 Fungi are souls of the dead
4 Get all agreements in writing
5 Gold buried in graveyards
6 Humans can’t dance
7 Immune to fire
8 Live on cake alone
9 Nearly perfected deadly song
10 Never reveal your name
11 Penal system must be a joke
12 The Nag-Lord really is a wag

=== PAGE 58 ===


=== PAGE 59 ===
Part Four
Classes
I
’ve worked with ‘em all. Fighters, knights, and
sword-twirling warriors of all kinds. Hunters, thieves,
and those who skulk for a living. Bards and enchant-
ers, with their charms and glamours and silver tongues. Clerics,
and friars, with a handy prayer or two. Even other magicians—
though they tend to get a bit jealous of my skills with a wand.
In any case, folks of all different adventuring professions are
useful to have around when you’re in a pinch. My advice? Just
make sure you can drink ‘em under the table when it comes
time to divvy up the loot.”
—Smyde Crumpwall, human magician
“

=== PAGE 60 ===
58
P a r t F o u r | c l a S S e S
Bard
Musicians and poets drawn to a life of wandering and adventure.Musicians and poets drawn to a life of wandering and adventure.
Prime Abilities Charisma and Dexterity
Hit Points 1d6 per Level, +1 after Level 10
Combat Aptitude Semi-martial
Armour Light and Medium, no shields
Weapons Small and Medium
W
orldly and well-travelled, bards are store-
houses of folklore and hearsay. Their music
and songs are woven with magic, which can
both protect and beguile.
Starting Equipment
Armour (roll 1d6): 1–2. None. 3–4. Leather armour. 5–6.
Chainmail.
Weapons (roll 1d6 twice): 1. Club. 2. 3 daggers. 3. Longsword.
4. Sling + 20 stones. 5. Shortbow + 20 arrows. 6. Shortsword.
Class items: Musical instrument (stringed or wind).
BARD SKILLS
As they advance in Level, bards improve their chance of
success with the Listen skill. They also have three addi-
tional, specialised skills. The Bard Skill Targets table lists
the character’s Skill Targets as they advance in Level.
Decipher Document
A successful check allows a bard to understand the gist of a
non-magical text in a language they do not speak, unravel
a cypher, or identify cryptically labelled landmarks on a
map.
Retrying: The bard may only attempt to read the same
document again after gaining a Level.
Legerdemain
A successful check allows a bard to perform a trick of
sleight of hand, such as palming a small object, slipping a
poison into a drink, or pilfering a small item in the posses-
sion of another creature.
Difficulty: –1 penalty per 3 Levels of the victim or observer
(e.g. a Level 6 target incurs a –2 penalty).
Natural 1: On a roll of natural 1, the bard must Save Versus
Doom to avoid being noticed. The Referee determines the
victim’s reaction.
Monster Lore
A successful check allows a bard to identify monsters
and their basic powers and vulnerabilities, based on their
appearances in myth and folklore.
Retrying: The bard may only attempt to identify the same
kind of monster again after gaining a Level.
COUNTER CHARM
While the bard plays music and sings, allies within 30′ are
immune to magical effects based on music or song and
gain a +2 bonus to Saving Throws against fairy magic.
Restrictions: A bard can use counter charm once per Turn.
While playing, the bard may move at half Speed, but cannot
attack or perform other actions.
Duration: The counter charm lasts as long as the bard
keeps playing.
Disrupting: If the bard is harmed or fails a Saving Throw,
the counter charm ends.
BARD SKILL TARGETS
Level 
Decipher
Doc.
Legerde-
main 
Listen 
Monster
Lore
1 6 6 5 5
2 5 6 5 5
3 5 6 5 4
4 5 5 5 4
5 5 5 4 4
6 4 5 4 4
7 4 5 4 3
8 4 4 4 3
9 4 4 3 3
10 3 4 3 3
11 3 3 3 3
12 3 3 3 2
13 2 3 3 2
14 2 3 2 2
15 2 2 2 2
Customising Bard Skills (Optional Rule)
The Bard Skill Targets table lists the standard skill
progression, granting a balanced advancement across
all skills. Players wishing to customise their character’s
skill advancement may use this optional rule.
Base Skill Target: All skills begin at 6.
Expertise points: Bards gain expertise points to
improve their skills. Each point allocated to a skill
lowers the Skill Target by 1.
At Level 1: At character creation, the player may allocate
2 expertise points.
Gaining Levels: At each Level gained, the player may
allocate 1 expertise point.
Minimum Skill Target: No Skill Target may be lowered
below 2.

=== PAGE 61 ===
P a r t F o u r | c l a S S e S
59
ENCHANTMENT
By playing music and singing, the bard can fascinate
subjects in a 30′ radius.
Restrictions: A bard may use enchantment once a day per
Level, and it cannot be used in combat. While playing, the
bard may move at half Speed, but cannot attack or perform
other actions.
Selecting subjects: One or more creatures whose Levels
total up to twice the bard’s Level can be affected. If a group
is targeted, the Referee selects the subjects randomly,
summing their Levels until the maximum is reached.
Types of subjects: At Level 1, the bard can affect mortals.
From Level 4, animals and demi-fey can also be affected.
From Level 7, fairies and monstrosities can also be affected.
Resisting: Each subject must Save Versus Spell or be fasci-
nated (see Fascinated Subjects).
Fascinated Subjects
Rapt: Fascinated subjects’ attention is fully bent on the
bard’s performance.
Follow: If the bard walks while playing, fascinated subjects
follow.
Interruptions: If the performance is interrupted (e.g. by
loud noise or violence), the fascination ends immediately.
Duration: The fascination lasts for as long as the bard’s
performance continues. Afterwards, fascinated subjects
may come under a stronger charm (see When the Perfor-
mance Ends).
When the Performance Ends
If the performance lasted for at least 1 Turn and ended
without interruption, each fascinated subject must make
another Save Versus Spell (with a +2 bonus) or be charmed
as follows.
Friendship: Charmed subjects regard the bard as a trusted
friend and ally, coming to the bard’s defence.
Commands: If they share a language, charmed subjects
obey the bard’s commands.
Resisting commands: The subject may resist commands
that contradict their habits or Alignment. Suicidal or
clearly harmful commands are always refused.
Duration: 1 Turn per Level of the bard.
BARD ADVANCEMENT
Save Targets
Level XP Hit Points Attack Doom Ray Hold Blast Spell
1 0 1d6 +0 13 14 13 15 15
2 1,750 +1d6 +0 13 14 13 15 15
3 3,500 +1d6 +1 12 13 12 14 14
4 7,000 +1d6 +1 12 13 12 14 14
5 14,000 +1d6 +2 11 12 11 13 13
6 28,000 +1d6 +2 11 12 11 13 13
7 56,000 +1d6 +3 10 11 10 12 12
8 112,000 +1d6 +3 10 11 10 12 12
9 220,000 +1d6 +4 9 10 9 11 11
10 340,000 +1d6 +4 9 10 9 11 11
11 460,000 +1 +5 8 9 8 10 10
12 580,000 +1 +5 8 9 8 10 10
13 700,000 +1 +6 7 8 7 9 9
14 820,000 +1 +6 7 8 7 9 9
15 940,000 +1 +7 6 7 6 8 8

=== PAGE 62 ===
60
P a r t F o u r | c l a S S e S
Cleric
Holy warriors in the service of the Pluritine Church.Holy warriors in the service of the Pluritine Church.
Prime Abilities Wisdom
Hit Points 1d6 per Level, +1 after Level 10
Combat Aptitude Semi-martial
Armour Any, including shields (except
arcane or fairy magic armour)
Weapons Any (except arcane or fairy magic
weapons)
C
lerics are members of an order of holy warriors
sworn to the service of the Pluritine Church. They
are organised in a strict religious hierarchy, under
the command of higher-ranking Church officials. Player
Character clerics are typically granted a writ of self-deter-
mination, allowing them to roam freely and carry out the
will of God as they see fit.
Restrictions
Alignment: As servants of the Church, clerics must be
Lawful or Neutral.
Falling from grace: Clerics must be faithful to the tenets
of their order (see Cleric Tenets). A cleric who transgresses
or becomes Chaotic falls from grace and loses the ability
to pray for spells. The Referee may allow the character to
perform a quest of atonement in order to regain favour.
Kindred: Only mortals are trained as clerics—fairies and
demi-fey have no spiritual connection with the deities of
mortals.
Magic armaments: Clerics are forbidden to use magic
weapons, armour, and shields of arcane or fairy origin.
They may only use holy magic armaments.
Starting Equipment
Armour (roll 1d6): 1. Leather. 2. Leather + shield. 3. Chain-
mail. 4. Chainmail + shield. 5. Plate mail. 6. Plate mail +
shield.
Weapons (roll 1d6 twice): 1. Dagger. 2. Longsword. 3. Mace.
4. Shortbow + 20 arrows. 5. Shortsword. 6. Warhammer.
Class items: Wooden holy symbol.
DETECT HOLY MAGIC ITEMS
A cleric can detect whether an item is enchanted with holy
magic.
Requirements: The cleric must touch the object and
concentrate without distraction.
Time: Detecting holy magic takes 1 Turn.
HOLY MAGIC
See Holy Magic, p100 for full details on holy magic,
including praying for spells and the list of spells that cler-
ics can cast.
Holy symbol: A cleric must carry a holy symbol (p117).
Spell casting: Once a cleric has proven their devotion (from
Level 2), the character may pray to the host of saints to
receive their blessings in the form of holy spells. The Cleric
Spells Per Day table shows the number of spells a cleric may
receive, determined by the character’s Level. For example,
a Level 3 cleric may have the blessing to cast at most two
Rank 1 spells.
Using magic items: Clerics can use magic items exclusive
to holy spell-casters (for example, magic rods or scrolls of
holy spells).
CLERIC SPELLS PER DAY
Spell Rank
Level 1 2 3 4 5
1 – – – – –
2 1 – – – –
3 2 – – – –
4 2 1 – – –
5 2 2 – – –
6 2 2 1 – –
7 3 2 2 – –
8 3 2 2 – –
9 3 3 2 1 –
10 3 3 2 2 –
11 4 3 3 2 –
12 4 3 3 2 1
13 4 4 3 2 2
14 4 4 3 3 2
15 5 4 4 3 2
Cleric Tenets
See p178 for more details on the Pluritine Church.
Evangelism: Non-believers are to be brought into the
fold and converted.
Hierarchy: The hierarchy of the Church is to be upheld.
Those of lesser rank must obey their superiors.
Monotheism: Only One True God exists, and His name
is ineffable. Other religions worship personifications of
divine aspects of God or the anointed saints.
Sanctity of life: Sentient life is sacred. Clerics must
protect the innocent with all means available.

=== PAGE 63 ===
P a r t F o u r | c l a S S e S
61
HOLY ORDER
Upon reaching Level 2, a cleric is initiated into one of the
following holy orders, selected by the player. Clerics of
each order gain a special power and bear the order’s holy
symbol.
The Order of St Faxis
The order of seekers; clerics who follow an edict to root out
practitioners of dark magic—those who truck with devils
or deal in necromancy.
Arcane antipathy: A cleric of St Faxis gains a +2 bonus to
Saving Throws against arcane magic. Arcane spell-casters
suffer a –2 penalty to Saving Throws against spells cast by
a cleric of St Faxis.
Holy symbol: Three crossed swords.
The Order of St Sedge
The defenders of the Church; clerics who protect the lands
of the Church from invaders.
Laying on hands: A cleric of St Sedge can heal by laying
their hands on wounded characters. Once a day, the cleric
can heal a total of up to 1 Hit Point per Level.
Holy symbol: A hand with two fingers raised.
The Order of St Signis
The order of Lichwards; clerics who watch over the dead
and hunt those which rise again as undead.
Undead slayer: A cleric of St Signis gains a +1 Attack bonus
against undead monsters. Their attacks harm undead
monsters that can normally only be harmed by magical
or silver weapons, even when not wielding a weapon of
the appropriate type.
Holy symbol: A human skull crowned with ivy.
LANGUAGES
In addition to their native languages, clerics speak Liturgic,
the language of Church scripture.
TURNING THE UNDEAD
A cleric may attempt to drive off undead monsters by
presenting their holy symbol and invoking the might of
the One True God.
Range: The undead must be within 30′. Concealed undead
(e.g. behind doors or in coffers) are unaffected.
Turning roll: When a cleric attempts to turn the undead,
roll 2d6 to determine the result (modifiers listed below):
▶ 4 or lower: The undead are unaffected.
▶ 5–6: 2d4 undead are stunned for 1 Round, unable to act.
▶ 7–12: 2d4 undead flee from the cleric for 1 Turn.
▶ 13 or higher: 2d4 undead are permanently destroyed.
Lower Level undead: If the undead are lower Level than the
cleric, the turning roll is modified by +2 per Level difference
(maximum +6). For example, a Level 5 cleric turning Level
3 undead would gain a +4 bonus.
Higher Level undead: If the undead are higher Level than
the cleric, the turning roll is modified by –2 per Level differ-
ence (maximum –6). For example, a Level 3 cleric turning
Level 6 undead would suffer a –6 penalty.
Mixed groups: In encounters with multiple types of
undead, those of lowest Level are affected first. On a
successful turning roll, the cleric may make another roll
the following Round, affecting the next lowest Level type
of undead present. This process may be repeated until all
types of undead have been affected or a turning roll fails.
Usage frequency: One attempt per Turn.
CLERIC ADVANCEMENT
Save Targets
Level XP Hit Points Attack Doom Ray Hold Blast Spell
1 0 1d6 +0 11 12 13 16 14
2 1,500 +1d6 +0 11 12 13 16 14
3 3,000 +1d6 +1 10 11 12 15 13
4 6,000 +1d6 +1 10 11 12 15 13
5 12,000 +1d6 +2 9 10 11 14 12
6 24,000 +1d6 +2 9 10 11 14 12
7 48,000 +1d6 +3 8 9 10 13 11
8 96,000 +1d6 +3 8 9 10 13 11
9 190,000 +1d6 +4 7 8 9 12 10
10 290,000 +1d6 +4 7 8 9 12 10
11 390,000 +1 +5 6 7 8 11 9
12 490,000 +1 +5 6 7 8 11 9
13 590,000 +1 +6 5 6 7 10 8
14 690,000 +1 +6 5 6 7 10 8
15 790,000 +1 +7 4 5 6 9 7
Cleric Holy Symbols
Clerics in Dolmenwood usually carry a Chapes (p178),
a pendant with an effigy of St Clewyd (holding the rod
of mercy and quill of justice), or the symbol of their
Holy Order.

=== PAGE 64 ===
62
P a r t F o u r | c l a S S e S
Enchanter
Wanderers who wield the magic of Fairy, currying favour with fairy nobles.Wanderers who wield the magic of Fairy, currying favour with fairy nobles.
Prime Abilities Charisma and Intelligence
Hit Points 1d6 per Level, +1 after Level 10
Combat Aptitude Semi-martial
Armour Light and Medium, no shields
Weapons Small and Medium
I
ndividuals whose contact with Fairy has imbued
them with innate magic known as glamours.
Enchanters are also blessed with the use of the
fairy runes, guarded by the lords of Fairy, though such gifts
are not always without cost.
Restrictions
Kindred: Typically only fairies and demi-fey (elves,
grimalkins, and woodgrues) are enchanters. Occasion-
ally a mortal with a strong connection to Fairy may also
be an enchanter—for example, a human with mixed elfish
ancestry, an individual kidnapped by fairies in childhood,
or someone who wandered lost in Fairy for many years.
Starting Equipment
Armour (roll 1d6): 1–2. None. 3–4. Leather armour. 5–6.
Chainmail.
Weapons (roll 1d6 twice): 1. Club. 2. Dagger. 3. Longsword.
4. Shortbow + 20 arrows. 5. Spear. 6. Staff.
ENCHANTER SKILLS
Enchanters have one additional, specialised skill. The
Enchanter Skill Targets table lists the character’s Skill
Targets as they advance in level.
Detect Magic
An enchanter can attempt to detect the subtle resonances
woven into an enchanted object, place, or creature. If the
attempt succeeds, the enchanter knows if the object, place,
or creature in question is magical—i.e. enchanted, affected
by a spell, or possessed of innate magic of some kind.
Requirements: The enchanter must touch the object,
place, or creature to be analysed and concentrate without
distraction.
Time: Each attempt to detect magic requires 1 Turn.
Retrying: The enchanter may retry failed attempts as often
as they wish, each attempt requiring an additional 1 Turn.
Referee rolls: The Referee rolls all Detect Magic Checks,
so that players do not know if the roll failed or if there is
no magic present.
Downtime: Given an hour of solitude in a safe location,
an enchanter automatically detects magic on an object,
place, or creature.
ENCHANTER SKILL TARGETS
Level Detect Magic Level Detect Magic
1 5 6 4
2 5 7 3
3 5 8 3
4 5 9 2
5 4 10+ 2

=== PAGE 65 ===
P a r t F o u r | c l a S S e S
63
FAIRY RUNES
Enchanters are granted the use of fairy runes—the secret,
magical sigils guarded by the rulers of Fairy. As a character
advances, fairy nobles may be drawn by the enchanter’s
great deeds and grant new runes. See Fairy Magic, p92
for details on the fairy runes.
At Level 1: An enchanter knows one randomly selected
rune of lesser magnitude.
Subsequent Levels: Each time the character gains a Level,
the player should roll for the chance of acquiring a new
rune. See Learning Runes, p92.
GLAMOURS
Enchanters possess minor magical talents known as glam-
ours (see p94). The number of glamours known is deter-
mined by the character’s level as shown in the Enchanter
Advancement table. Known glamours are determined
randomly.
Kindred glamours: Some Kindreds (e.g. elf, grimalkin)
gain glamours as a result of their ancestry. Such glamours
are in addition to glamours gained by this Class. For exam-
ple, a Level 1 human enchanter knows 1 glamour, whereas
a Level 1 elf enchanter knows 2 glamours—one from their
Kindred and one from their Class.
MAGIC ITEMS
The enchanter’s natural affinities allow the use of magical
items exclusive to arcane spell-casters (for example, magic
wands or scrolls of arcane spells).
RESISTANCE TO DIVINE AID
The saints of the Pluritine Church are loath to aid those
allied with the godless world of Fairy. If an enchanter is the
subject of a beneficial holy spell, there is a 2-in-6 chance it
has no effect.
ENCHANTER ADVANCEMENT
Save Targets
Level XP Hit Points Attack Glamours Doom Ray Hold Blast Spell
1 0 1d6 +0 1 11 12 13 16 14
2 1,750 +1d6 +0 2 11 12 13 16 14
3 3,500 +1d6 +1 3 10 11 12 15 13
4 7,000 +1d6 +1 3 10 11 12 15 13
5 14,000 +1d6 +2 4 9 10 11 14 12
6 28,000 +1d6 +2 5 9 10 11 14 12
7 56,000 +1d6 +3 6 8 9 10 13 11
8 112,000 +1d6 +3 6 8 9 10 13 11
9 220,000 +1d6 +4 7 7 8 9 12 10
10 340,000 +1d6 +4 7 7 8 9 12 10
11 460,000 +1 +5 8 6 7 8 11 9
12 580,000 +1 +5 8 6 7 8 11 9
13 700,000 +1 +6 9 5 6 7 10 8
14 820,000 +1 +6 9 5 6 7 10 8
15 940,000 +1 +7 10 4 5 6 9 7

=== PAGE 66 ===
64
P a r t F o u r | c l a S S e S
Fighter
Mercenaries, soldiers, and ruffians who turn their talents to the adventuring life.Mercenaries, soldiers, and ruffians who turn their talents to the adventuring life.
Prime Abilities Strength
Hit Points 1d8 per Level, +2 after Level 10
Combat Aptitude Martial
Armour Any, including shields
Weapons Any
F
ighters are experienced in combat and warfare,
whether as brigands, tavern brawlers, town
guards, or veterans of a noble house’s army. In
an adventuring party, fighters usually take the front-line,
battling foes and defending weaker characters.
Starting Equipment
Armour (roll 1d6): 1. Leather armour. 2. Leather armour +
shield. 3. Chainmail. 4. Chainmail + shield. 5. Plate mail. 6.
Plate mail + shield.
Weapons (roll 1d6 twice): 1. Crossbow + 20 quarrels. 2.
Dagger. 3. Longsword. 4. Mace. 5. Shortsword. 6. Spear.
COMBAT TALENTS
Fighters’ expert training grants them special talents to aid
in battle. At Levels 2, 6, 10, and 14 the player should roll or
choose one of the following talents.
1. Battle rage: When in melee, the fighter can choose to
enter a berserk rage that lasts until the end of combat.
While in the rage, the fighter gains a +2 bonus to Attack
and Damage Rolls, but suffers a –4 penalty to Armour
Class and is unable to flee.
2. Cleave: When in melee with multiple foes, if the fighter
strikes a killing blow, they may immediately make
another attack against a second foe. The second Attack
Roll is penalised at –2.
3. Defender: When the fighter is in melee with a foe, any
Attack Rolls the foe makes against characters other than
the fighter are penalised at –2.
4. Last stand: If the fighter is killed by being reduced to
0 Hit Points, they can continue to act for up to 5 addi-
tional Rounds before dying. Each time the fighter suffers
further damage during this period, they must Save
Versus Doom or die. Magical healing is effective during
this period, but the fighter must still Save Versus Doom
when damaged, even if healed to above 0 HP.
5. Leader: Mercenaries or retainers under the fighter’s
command and within 60′ gain a +1 bonus to Morale or
Loyalty. All the fighter’s allies within 60′ gain a +2 bonus
to Saving Throws against fear effects.
6. Main gauche: When fighting with a Small melee weapon
(e.g. a dagger or hand axe) in the off hand (in place of
a shield), the fighter may choose each Round to gain
either a +1 Armour Class bonus or a +1 Attack bonus.
7. Slayer: The fighter gains a +1 bonus to Attack and
Damage Rolls when in combat with foes of a specific
type. The type of enemy must be chosen when this
talent is selected (examples: bears, crookhorns, undead,
wyrms, etc.). This talent may be chosen multiple times,
each time for a different type of foe.
8. Weapon specialist: The fighter is an expert with a
specific type of weapon chosen by the player (e.g.
maces, two-handed swords, longbows, etc.). They gain
a +1 bonus to Attack and Damage Rolls using this type
of weapon. This talent may be chosen multiple times,
each time for a different type of weapon.

=== PAGE 67 ===
P a r t F o u r | c l a S S e S
65
FIGHTER ADVANCEMENT
Combat
Talents
Save Targets
Level XP Hit Points Attack Doom Ray Hold Blast Spell
1 0 1d8 +1 0 12 13 14 15 16
2 2,000 +1d8 +1 1 12 13 14 15 16
3 4,000 +1d8 +2 1 11 12 13 14 15
4 8,000 +1d8 +3 1 10 11 12 13 14
5 16,000 +1d8 +3 1 10 11 12 13 14
6 32,000 +1d8 +4 2 9 10 11 12 13
7 64,000 +1d8 +5 2 8 9 10 11 12
8 128,000 +1d8 +5 2 8 9 10 11 12
9 260,000 +1d8 +6 2 7 8 9 10 11
10 380,000 +1d8 +7 3 6 7 8 9 10
11 500,000 +2 +7 3 6 7 8 9 10
12 620,000 +2 +8 3 5 6 7 8 9
13 740,000 +2 +9 3 4 5 6 7 8
14 860,000 +2 +9 4 4 5 6 7 8
15 980,000 +2 +10 4 3 4 5 6 7

=== PAGE 68 ===
66
P a r t F o u r | c l a S S e S
Friar
Wandering ascetics who spread the gospel of the Pluritine Church.Wandering ascetics who spread the gospel of the Pluritine Church.
Prime Abilities Intelligence and Wisdom
Hit Points 1d4 per Level, +1 after Level 10
Combat Aptitude Non-martial
Armour None
Weapons Club, dagger, holy water, oil, sling,
staff, torch
F
riars are monks or nuns who have taken to a life of
wandering, doing good wherever they can. They
are only loosely affiliated with the Church and
exist outside the strict religious hierarchy of the clergy.
Friars are thus beloved by the common folk, whom they
often aid where the Church does not.
Restrictions
Alignment: As servants of the Church, friars must be
Lawful or Neutral.
Falling from grace: Friars must be faithful to the tenets
of their order (see Friar Tenets). A friar who transgresses
or becomes Chaotic falls from grace and loses the ability
to pray for spells. The Referee may allow the character to
perform a quest of atonement in order to regain favour.
Kindred: Only mortals are trained as friars—fairies and
demi-fey have no spiritual connection with the deities of
mortals.
Starting Equipment
Weapon (roll 1d6): 1. Club. 2. Dagger. 3–4. Sling + 20 stones.
5–6. Staff.
Class items: Friar’s habit, wooden holy symbol.
ARMOUR OF FAITH
The divine blessing of the One True God grants friars a
bonus to Armour Class, depending on their Level. See the
Friar Advancement table.
CULINARY IMPLEMENTS
A friar can employ a frying pan, cured sausage, or even a
ham shank as a melee weapon, doing 1d4 damage.
FRIAR SKILLS
Friars have a Skill Target of 5 for Survival when foraging.
HERBALISM
In the hands of a friar, a single dose of a medicinal herb
(for example those listed under Common Fungi and Herbs,
p130) is sufficient for 2 subjects.
HOLY MAGIC
See Holy Magic, p100 for full details on holy magic,
including praying for spells and the list of spells that friars
can cast.
Holy symbol: A friar must carry a holy symbol (p117).
Spell casting: Friars may pray to the host of saints and
receive blessings in the form of holy spells. The Friar
Spells Per Day table shows the number of spells a friar may
receive, determined by the character’s Level. For example,
a Level 2 friar may cast at most two Rank 1 spells.
Using magic items: Friars can use magic items exclusive
to holy spell-casters (for example, magic rods or scrolls of
holy spells).
FRIAR SPELLS PER DAY
Spell Rank
Level 1 2 3 4 5
1 1 – – – –
2 2 – – – –
3 2 1 – – –
4 2 2 – – –
5 3 2 1 – –
6 3 2 2 – –
7 3 3 2 1 –
8 4 3 2 2 –
9 4 3 3 2 1
10 4 4 3 2 2
11 5 4 3 3 2
12 5 4 4 3 2
13 5 5 4 3 3
14 6 5 4 4 3
15 6 5 5 4 3
Friar Tenets
See p178 for more details on the Pluritine Church.
Sanctity of life: All life is sacred. Friars must protect
and aid the needy with all means available.
Monotheism: Only One True God exists, and His name
is ineffable. Other religions worship personifications of
divine aspects of God or the anointed saints.
Spiritual insight: Each individual must form their own
relationship with God, through study and insight.
Mentorship: Friars must share their wisdom with
common folk and non-believers, guiding them into
the ways of the Pluritine Church.

=== PAGE 69 ===
P a r t F o u r | c l a S S e S
67
LANGUAGES
In addition to their native languages, friars speak Liturgic,
the language of Church scripture.
POVERTY
Due to their monastic vows, a friar’s worldly possessions
are limited to that which can be carried on their person or
mount. Excess wealth must be donated to worthy causes
(not other PCs).
Furthermore, a friar must dress in a simple habit and cut
their hair in a traditional tonsure.
TURNING THE UNDEAD
A friar may attempt to drive off undead monsters by
presenting their holy symbol and invoking the might of
the One True God.
Range: The undead must be within 30′. Concealed undead
(e.g. behind doors or in coffers) are unaffected.
Turning roll: When a friar attempts to turn the undead,
roll 2d6 to determine the result (modifiers listed below):
▶ 4 or lower: The undead are unaffected.
▶ 5–6: 2d4 undead are stunned for 1 Round, unable to act.
▶ 7–12: 2d4 undead flee from the friar for 1 Turn.
▶ 13 or higher: 2d4 undead are permanently destroyed.
Lower Level undead: If the undead are lower Level than the
friar, the turning roll is modified by +2 per Level difference
(maximum +6). For example, a Level 5 friar turning Level
3 undead would gain a +4 bonus.
Higher Level undead: If the undead are higher Level than
the friar, the turning roll is modified by –2 per Level differ-
ence (maximum –6). For example, a Level 3 friar turning
Level 6 undead would suffer a –6 penalty.
Mixed groups: In encounters with multiple types of
undead, those of lowest Level are affected first. On a
successful turning roll, the friar may make another roll
the following Round, affecting the next lowest Level type
of undead present. This process may be repeated until all
types of undead have been affected or a turning roll fails.
Usage frequency: One attempt per Turn.
FRIAR ADVANCEMENT
Save Targets
Level XP Hit Points Attack AC Bonus Doom Ray Hold Blast Spell
1 0 1d4 +0 +2 11 12 13 16 14
2 1,750 +1d4 +0 +2 11 12 13 16 14
3 3,500 +1d4 +0 +2 11 12 13 16 14
4 7,000 +1d4 +1 +3 10 11 12 15 13
5 14,000 +1d4 +1 +3 10 11 12 15 13
6 28,000 +1d4 +1 +3 10 11 12 15 13
7 56,000 +1d4 +2 +4 9 10 11 14 12
8 112,000 +1d4 +2 +4 9 10 11 14 12
9 220,000 +1d4 +2 +4 9 10 11 14 12
10 340,000 +1d4 +3 +4 8 9 10 13 11
11 460,000 +1 +3 +5 8 9 10 13 11
12 580,000 +1 +3 +5 8 9 10 13 11
13 700,000 +1 +4 +5 7 8 9 12 10
14 820,000 +1 +4 +5 7 8 9 12 10
15 940,000 +1 +4 +5 7 8 9 12 10
Friar Holy Symbols
Friars usually carry a pendant with an effigy of a saint
whose deeds inspire their faith. See Holy Magic, p100
for details on the major saints and their areas of patron-
age.

=== PAGE 70 ===
68
P a r t F o u r | c l a S S e S
Hunter
Expert trackers, stalkers, and killers, at home in the wild woods.Expert trackers, stalkers, and killers, at home in the wild woods.
Prime Abilities Constitution and Dexterity
Hit Points 1d8 per Level, +2 after Level 10
Combat Aptitude Martial
Armour Light, shields
Weapons Any
H
ardened to a life in the wilds, hunters develop a
keen survival instinct and an intuitive connec-
tion with wild animals. A hunter’s knowledge of
tracking, hunting, and survival is invaluable to any party
travelling deep into Dolmenwood.
Starting Equipment
Armour (roll 1d6): 1–3. Leather armour. 4–6. Leather
armour + shield.
Weapons (roll 1d6 twice): 1. Dagger. 2. Longsword. 3–4.
Longbow + 20 arrows (shortbow + 20 arrows for Small char-
acters). 5. Shortsword. 6. Sling + 20 stones.
ANIMAL COMPANION
A hunter may attempt to forge a bond with an animal. If
the bond is successfully established, the animal becomes
the hunter’s loyal companion.
Requirements
One companion: A hunter may have but a single animal
companion. If a companion dies or is dismissed, the hunter
may attempt to forge a connection with a new animal.
Type of animal: Both wild and domestic animals may
be companions. Giant or magical animals may become a
hunter’s companion at the Referee’s discretion. Sentient
animal species are not suitable.
Level: An animal companion may not exceed the hunter’s
Level.
Establishing a Connection
The hunter must approach the animal and interact in a
peaceful manner for 1 Turn. On a successful Charisma
Check, the animal becomes the hunter’s companion.
Companion’s Behaviour
Once a connection is successfully established, the animal
companion follows the hunter everywhere. It understands
basic commands from the hunter (even if its species would
not normally do so). The companion fights to defend the
hunter, never checking Morale.
HUNTER SKILLS
As they advance in Level, hunters improve their chance
of success with the Survival skill. They also have three
additional, specialised skills. The Hunter Skill Targets table
lists the character’s Skill Targets as they advance in Level.
Alertness
If a hunter’s party is surprised, the hunter may make an
Alertness Check to act normally in the Surprise Round.
See Surprise, p164.
Stalking
Hiding: A hunter may make a Stalking Check to remain
undetected when the only cover available is light brush
(see Hiding and Ambushes under Stealth, p154).
Sneaking: If a Surprise Roll indicates that a hunter’s party
has been detected, the hunter may make a Stalking Check
to remain undetected. See Surprise, p164.
Wilderness only: Hunters can only use Stalking in the
wilds (i.e. not in settlements, indoors, or in subterranean
space).

=== PAGE 71 ===
P a r t F o u r | c l a S S e S
69
HUNTER ADVANCEMENT
Save Targets
Level XP Hit Points Attack Doom Ray Hold Blast Spell
1 0 1d8 +1 12 13 14 15 16
2 2,250 +1d8 +1 12 13 14 15 16
3 4,500 +1d8 +2 11 12 13 14 15
4 9,000 +1d8 +3 10 11 12 13 14
5 18,000 +1d8 +3 10 11 12 13 14
6 36,000 +1d8 +4 9 10 11 12 13
7 72,000 +1d8 +5 8 9 10 11 12
8 144,000 +1d8 +5 8 9 10 11 12
9 290,000 +1d8 +6 7 8 9 10 11
10 420,000 +1d8 +7 6 7 8 9 10
11 550,000 +2 +7 6 7 8 9 10
12 680,000 +2 +8 5 6 7 8 9
13 810,000 +2 +9 4 5 6 7 8
14 940,000 +2 +9 4 5 6 7 8
15 1,070,000 +2 +10 3 4 5 6 7
HUNTER SKILL TARGETS
Level Alertness Stalking Survival Tracking
1 6 6 5 5
2 6 6 4 5
3 6 6 4 4
4 6 5 4 4
5 5 5 4 4
6 5 5 3 4
7 5 5 3 3
8 5 4 3 3
9 4 4 3 3
10 4 3 3 3
11 4 3 2 3
12 4 3 2 2
13 3 3 2 2
14 3 2 2 2
15 2 2 2 2
Customising Hunter Skills (Optional Rule)
The Hunter Skill Targets table lists the standard skill
progression, granting a balanced advancement across
all skills. Players wishing to customise their character’s
skill advancement may use this optional rule.
Base Skill Target: All skills begin at 6.
Expertise points: Hunters gain expertise points to
improve their skills. Each point allocated to a skill
lowers the Skill Target by 1.
At Level 1: At character creation, the player may allocate
2 expertise points.
Gaining Levels: At each Level gained, the player may
allocate 1 expertise point.
Minimum Skill Target: No Skill Target may be lowered
below 2.
Tracking
A successful check allows a hunter to find tracks left by
creatures in a 30′ × 30′ area. The hunter knows the type of
creatures that made the tracks and may follow the tracks.
Time: An attempt to find tracks takes 1 Turn.
Retrying: The hunter may not attempt to find tracks again
in the same location.
Following tracks: The hunter can follow discovered tracks
until conditions worsen (see Modifiers, below). Another
Tracking Check is then required.
Modifiers: The Referee may specify situational modifi-
ers depending on the conditions, for example: +1 for soft
ground, –1 for hard; +1 for tracks made by a group of 10 or
more creatures; –2 for active attempts to cover tracks; –1
per day since the tracks were made, –1 per hour of rain or
covering snow; –1 for poor lighting.
Wilderness only: Hunters can only use Tracking in the
wilds (i.e. not in settlements, indoors, or in subterranean
space).
MISSILE ATTACKS
Hunters gain a +1 Attack bonus with all missile weapons.
TROPHIES
After hunting down (i.e. tracking, ambushing, or chasing)
and slaying a creature, a hunter may take a trophy from
it—for example, a stag’s antlers, a wyrm’s tooth, etc.
Size: Trophies must be sizeable items (weighing at least
50 coins).
Boon: If a trophy is either on the hunter’s person or
mounted in their home, it acts as a charm: the hunter gains
a +1 bonus to Attack Rolls against other creatures of the
same type and a +1 bonus to Saving Throws against their
special attacks.
WAYFINDING
If the Referee determines that the hunter’s party has
become lost, there is a 3-in-6 chance that the hunter can
find the path again.

=== PAGE 72 ===
70
P a r t F o u r | c l a S S e S
Knight
Warriors who serve a noble, doing their bidding and upholding their honour.Warriors who serve a noble, doing their bidding and upholding their honour.
Prime Abilities Charisma and Strength
Hit Points 1d8 per Level, +2 after Level 10
Combat Aptitude Martial
Armour Medium and Heavy, shields
Weapons Any melee weapons
K
nights are masters of heavily armoured, mounted
combat and, as vassals of a noble house, hold a
special rank in society. Knights earn great respect
from the common folk and exemplify the qualities of
nobility, honour, and decency in all their deeds. Player
Character knights are typically knights-errant—those who
wander the land in pursuit of adventure to prove their
chivalric virtues.
Liege
A knight serves one of the lower noble houses of Dolmen-
wood (i.e. excluding House Brackenwold, which rules all
of Dolmenwood). The player should roll or choose one of
the houses listed under The Lower Houses of Dolmenwood.
See p176 for more detail on the noble houses.
Disfavour: Knighthood may be revoked if a knight
displeases or dishonours their liege through failure, rebel-
lion, Alignment change, or non-chivalric conduct. In this
case, the character becomes a fighter of equivalent Level.
It may be possible to regain the liege’s favour (and thus
the status of knighthood) by performing a special quest.
Restrictions
Alignment: A knight must have the same Alignment as
their liege.
Kindred: It is uncommon for Kindreds other than humans
and breggles to be trained as knights in the service of the
noble houses of Dolmenwood.
Social class: Knights are often members of the noble
classes, but a person of lowlier origin may be initiated as a
knight as a reward for noble deeds.
Weapons: Knights can use all melee weapons (preferring
the lance) but cannot use missile weapons, which they
regard as dishonourable.
Armour: Knights regard armour as a symbol of prowess
and status, always favouring the most impressive and
impervious-looking armour available. They scorn Light
armour as suitable only for peasants and villains.
Starting Equipment
Armour (roll 1d6): 1. Chainmail. 2–3. Chainmail + shield. 4.
Plate mail. 5–6. Plate mail + shield.
Weapons (roll 1d6 twice): 1. Dagger. 2–4. Lance (spear for
Small characters). 5. Longsword. 6. Mace.
CHIVALRIC CODE
Knights strive to uphold a stringent code of honour which
binds all decision and deed. See The Code of Chivalry. The
repercussions of performing acts at odds with the code
of chivalry depend on the Alignment of the knight and
their liege.
Lawful or Neutral: The knight brings dishonour upon their
liege, thus risking Disfavour.
Chaotic: The knight is unlikely to bring dishonour upon
their liege, whose reputation is already villainous. Unchiv-
alrous deeds are, however, perceived as besmirching the
institution of knighthood. Other knights hunt the Chaotic
knight and attempt to bring them to justice.
HORSEMANSHIP
Assessing steeds: Knights are expert riders and can assess
the worth of any steed. This allows a knight to determine
whether an animal has low, average, or high Hit Points for
its type.
Urging great speed: From Level 5, a knight can urge their
steed to great haste once a day, increasing its Speed by 10
for up to 6 Turns.
KNIGHTHOOD
Knights of Levels 1–2 are known as squires and are not yet
regarded as true knights. Upon reaching Level 3, the char-
acter is knighted by their liege and gains the right to bear
a coat of arms, typically emblazoned upon the knight’s
shield.
Hospitality: Once knighted, the character earns rights of
hospitality and aid from nobles and other knights of the
same Alignment. Hospitality extends to any companions
the knight is willing to vouch for. The knight is expected
to extend such hospitality in kind.
MONSTER SLAYER
From Level 5, a knight gains a +2 bonus to Attack and
Damage Rolls against Large creatures.
MOUNTED COMBAT
Knights gain a +1 Attack bonus when mounted.
STRENGTH OF WILL
Knights gain a +2 bonus to Saving Throws against fairy
magic and effects that cause fear.

=== PAGE 73 ===
P a r t F o u r | c l a S S e S
71
The Code of Chivalry
Honour: A knight must behave honourably in all deeds.
A knight’s honour is of utmost importance. Death is
preferable to dishonour.
Service: Service to one’s liege is the greatest honour.
Glory: A knight must seek glory in battle—especially
in single combat.
Protecting the weak: Any person in the knight’s charge
must be defended to the death.
Hierarchy: The hierarchy that binds society is to be
upheld. Superiors must be honoured, equals respected,
inferiors commanded, and the ignoble scorned.
THE LOWER HOUSES OF DOLMENWOOD
1. House Guillefer (Neutral): Dreamy
and aloof. Rulership shared between
family members on a rotating basis—
currently Lord Edwin Guillefer.
2. House Harrowmoor (Lawful): Stead-
fast and militant. Under the rulership
of Lady Theatrice Harrowmoor.
3. House Hogwarsh (Neutral): Lax and
debauched. Under the rulership of
Baron Sagewine Hogwarsh.
4. House Malbleat (Chaotic): Conniv-
ing and tyrannical. One of the ancient
breggle noble houses, under the ruler-
ship of Lord Gryphius Malbleat.
5. House Mulbreck (Lawful): Reclusive
and detached. Under the rulership of
Lady Pulsephine Mulbreck.
6. House Murkin (Chaotic): Belligerent
and ambitious. One of the ancient breg-
gle noble houses, under the rulership
of Lord Simeone Murkin.
7. House Nodlock (Neutral): Bombastic
and decaying. Under the rulership of
Lord Harald Nodlock.
8. House Ramius (Neutral): Dignified
and shrewd. One of the ancient breggle
noble houses, under the rulership of
Lord Shadgore Ramius.
KNIGHT ADVANCEMENT
Save Targets
Level XP Hit Points Attack Doom Ray Hold Blast Spell
1 0 1d8 +1 12 13 12 15 15
2 2,250 +1d8 +1 12 13 12 15 15
3 4,500 +1d8 +2 11 12 11 14 14
4 9,000 +1d8 +3 10 11 10 13 13
5 18,000 +1d8 +3 10 11 10 13 13
6 36,000 +1d8 +4 9 10 9 12 12
7 72,000 +1d8 +5 8 9 8 11 11
8 144,000 +1d8 +5 8 9 8 11 11
9 290,000 +1d8 +6 7 8 7 10 10
10 420,000 +1d8 +7 6 7 6 9 9
11 550,000 +2 +7 6 7 6 9 9
12 680,000 +2 +8 5 6 5 8 8
13 810,000 +2 +9 4 5 4 7 7
14 940,000 +2 +9 4 5 4 7 7
15 1,070,000 +2 +10 3 4 3 6 6

=== PAGE 74 ===
72
P a r t F o u r | c l a S S e S
Magician
Connoisseurs of secret arcane lore who wield powerful magic.Connoisseurs of secret arcane lore who wield powerful magic.
Prime Abilities Intelligence
Hit Points 1d4 per Level, +1 after Level 10
Combat Aptitude Non-martial
Armour None
Weapons Dagger, holy water, oil, staff, torch
M
agicians—sometimes called wizards or sorcer-
ers—hone innate sparks of magical sensitivity
through years of arduous study. Magicians are
arcane generalists, accumulating secret lore from any
source they can get their hands on—magic of illusion,
crystalmancy, elementalism, conjuration, and sometimes
even stolen Drune spells. Their accumulation of knowl-
edge allows magicians to cast spells and to wield powerful
magic items. Magicians begin play able to cast just a single
spell each day, but gain access to extremely potent magic
as they advance.
Starting Equipment
Weapon (roll 1d6): 1–3. Dagger. 4–6. Staff.
Class items: Ritual robes. A Level 1 magician starts play
with a single spell book and has learned to cast the spells
contained within. The player should roll or choose one of
the books listed under Starting Spell Books.
Starting Spell Books
A Level 1 magician possesses a single spell book and
has learned to cast the spells it describes. A magician’s
first spell book may be an item inherited from a myste-
rious ancestor, stolen from a cruel master, or meticu-
lously copied under the tutelage of a mentor. The player
should roll or choose one of the following books.
1. Charms of the Fey Court: Contains the following
Rank 1 spells: Fairy Servant, Ingratiate, Ventriloquism.
2. Hogbrand’s Incandescence: Contains the following
Rank 1 spells: Firelight, Ignite / Extinguish, Shield of
Force.
3. Lord Oberon’s Seals: Contains the following Rank 1
spells: Decipher, Glyph of Sealing, Vapours of Dream.
4. Oliphan’s Folio: Contains the following Rank 1
spells: Crystal Resonance, Ioun Shard, Shield of Force.
5. Smythe’s Illuminations: Contains the following
Rank 1 spells: Decipher, Ignite / Extinguish, Ioun
Shard.
6. The Treatise on Force and Dissolution: Contains the
following Rank 1 spells: Crystal Resonance, Floating
Disc, Vapours of Dream.

=== PAGE 75 ===
P a r t F o u r | c l a S S e S
73
MAGICIAN ADVANCEMENT
Save Targets
Level XP Hit Points Attack Doom Ray Hold Blast Spell
1 0 1d4 +0 14 14 13 16 14
2 2,500 +1d4 +0 14 14 13 16 14
3 5,000 +1d4 +0 14 14 13 16 14
4 10,000 +1d4 +1 13 13 12 15 13
5 20,000 +1d4 +1 13 13 12 15 13
6 40,000 +1d4 +1 13 13 12 15 13
7 80,000 +1d4 +2 12 12 11 14 12
8 160,000 +1d4 +2 12 12 11 14 12
9 320,000 +1d4 +2 12 12 11 14 12
10 470,000 +1d4 +3 11 11 10 13 11
11 620,000 +1 +3 11 11 10 13 11
12 770,000 +1 +3 11 11 10 13 11
13 920,000 +1 +4 10 10 9 12 10
14 1,070,000 +1 +4 10 10 9 12 10
15 1,220,000 +1 +4 10 10 9 12 10
MAGICIAN SPELLS PER DAY
Spell Rank
Level 1 2 3 4 5 6
1 1 – – – – –
2 2 – – – – –
3 2 1 – – – –
4 2 2 – – – –
5 2 2 1 – – –
6 3 2 2 – – –
7 3 2 2 1 – –
8 3 3 2 2 – –
9 3 3 2 2 1 –
10 4 3 3 2 2 –
11 4 3 3 2 2 1
12 4 4 3 3 2 2
13 4 4 3 3 3 2
14 5 4 4 3 3 2
15 5 4 4 3 3 3
ARCANE MAGIC
See Arcane Magic, p78 for full details on arcane magic,
including learning spells, spell memorisation, and the list
of spells that magicians can learn.
Spell casting: The Magician Spells Per Day table shows the
number of spells a magician may memorise, determined
by the character’s Level. For example, a Level 3 magician
may memorise at most two Rank 1 spells and one Rank 2
spell.
Using magic items: Magicians can use magic items exclu-
sive to arcane spell-casters (for example, magic wands or
scrolls of arcane spells).
MAGICIAN SKILL TARGETS
Level Detect Magic Level Detect Magic
1 6 6 4
2 6 7 4
3 5 8 4
4 5 9 3
5 5 10+ 3
MAGICIAN SKILLS
Magicians have one additional, specialised skill. The Magi-
cian Skill Targets table lists the character’s Skill Targets as
they advance in level.
Detect Magic
A magician can attempt to detect the subtle resonances
woven into an enchanted object, place, or creature. If the
attempt succeeds, the magician knows if the object, place,
or creature in question is magical—i.e. enchanted, affected
by a spell, or possessed of innate magic of some kind.
Requirements: The magician must touch the object, place,
or creature to be analysed and concentrate without distrac-
tion.
Time: Each attempt to detect magic requires 1 Turn.
Retrying: The magician may retry failed attempts as often
as they wish, each attempt requiring an additional 1 Turn.
Referee rolls: The Referee rolls all Detect Magic Checks,
so that players do not know if the roll failed or if there is
no magic present.
Downtime: Given an hour of solitude in a safe location, a
magician automatically detects magic on an object, place,
or creature.

=== PAGE 76 ===
74
P a r t F o u r | c l a S S e S
Thief
Rogues who live by skills of deception and stealth.Rogues who live by skills of deception and stealth.
Prime Abilities Dexterity
Hit Points 1d4 per Level, +1 after Level 10
Combat Aptitude Semi-martial
Armour Light, no shields
Weapons Small and Medium
I
nveterate scoundrels, thieves are always on the
lookout for their next mark, scam, or get rich
quick scheme. Many thieves are drawn to a life
of adventure, relishing exploration, peril, and the promise
of great wealth.
Starting Equipment
Armour (roll 1d6): 1–3. None. 4–6. Leather.
Weapons (roll 1d6 twice): 1. Club. 2. 3 daggers. 3. Longsword.
4. Shortbow + 20 arrows. 5. Shortsword. 6. Sling + 20 stones.
Class items: Thieves’ tools.
BACK-STAB
Thieves are proficient in dealing deadly blows when attack-
ing from behind with a dagger in melee.
Conditions: The thief must be positioned behind the
target, and the target must be unaware of the thief’s pres-
ence. If the thief successfully used their Stealth skill to hide
or sneak, the target is considered unaware.
Type of target: Back-stab may only be used against
mortals, fairies, or demi-fey of Small or Medium size.
Bonuses: The thief gains a +4 Attack bonus and inflicts
3d4 damage (modified by Strength) on a successful strike.
Magic daggers also add their enchantment bonus to back-
stab damage.
THIEF SKILLS
As they advance in level, thieves improve their chance of
success with the Listen and Search skills. They also have six
additional, specialised skills. The Thief Skill Targets table
lists the character’s Skill Targets as they advance in Level.
Climb Wall
A successful check allows a thief to climb vertical or very
steep surfaces with only minimal handholds. The thief
does not require any special climbing equipment.
Easier circumstances: Thieves make easier climbs without
a roll (e.g. see Climbing, p150).
Long climbs: For climbs of over 100′, a Climb Wall Check is
required for each stretch of up to 100′. For example, a climb
of 150′ requires two checks.
Failure: The thief is unable to find suitable handholds and
makes no progress with the climb.
Natural 1: On a roll of natural 1, the thief must Save Versus
Doom or fall from the half way point, suffering 1d6 damage
per 10′ of the fall.
Retrying: The thief may retry failed attempts as often as
they wish, each subsequent attempt requiring 1 Turn.
Decipher Document
A successful check allows a thief to understand the gist of a
non-magical text in a language they do not speak, unravel
a cypher, or identify cryptically labelled landmarks on a
map.
Retrying: The thief may only attempt to read the same
document again after gaining a Level.
Disarm Mechanism
A successful check allows a thief to disarm complex, clock-
work-like trap mechanisms hidden in a lock, lid, door
handle, or similar. Thieves’ tools are required for disarm-
ing mechanism traps (see Adventuring Gear, p116).
Time: Each attempt to disarm a trap requires 1 Turn.
Retrying: The thief may retry failed attempts as often as
they wish, each attempt requiring an additional 1 Turn.
Natural 1: On a roll of natural 1, the thief must Save Versus
Doom or accidentally spring the trap.
Legerdemain
A successful check allows a thief to pilfer a small item in
the possession of another creature or perform a trick of
sleight of hand, such as palming a small object or slipping
a poison into a drink.
Difficulty: –1 penalty per three Levels of the victim or
observer (e.g. a Level 6 target incurs a –2 penalty).
Natural 1: On a roll of natural 1, the thief must Save Versus
Doom to avoid being noticed. The Referee determines the
victim’s reaction.
Pick Lock
A successful check allows a thief to open a lock without
the key. Thieves’ tools are required for picking locks (see
Adventuring Gear, p116).
Time: Each attempt to pick a lock requires 1 Turn.
Retrying: The thief may retry failed attempts as often as
they wish, each attempt requiring an additional 1 Turn.
Difficult locks: The Referee may rule that certain locks are
more difficult. Advanced locks incur a penalty to the Pick
Lock Check or only allow a fixed number of attempts, after
which the thief is stymied and may only try again after
gaining a Level.

=== PAGE 77 ===
P a r t F o u r | c l a S S e S
75
Stealth
Hiding: A thief may make a Stealth Check to remain unde-
tected when shadows are the only cover available. See
Hiding and Ambushes under Stealth, p154.
Sneaking: If a Surprise Roll indicates that a thief’s party
has been detected, the thief may make a Stealth Check to
remain undetected. See Surprise, p164 and Sneaking
under Stealth, p154.
THIEVES’ CANT
In addition to their native languages, thieves learn a secret
language of gestures and code words that allows them to
hide messages in seemingly normal conversations.
THIEF ADVANCEMENT
Save Targets
Level XP Hit Points Attack Doom Ray Hold Blast Spell
1 0 1d4 +0 13 14 13 15 15
2 1,200 +1d4 +0 13 14 13 15 15
3 2,400 +1d4 +1 12 13 12 14 14
4 4,800 +1d4 +1 12 13 12 14 14
5 9,600 +1d4 +2 11 12 11 13 13
6 19,200 +1d4 +2 11 12 11 13 13
7 38,400 +1d4 +3 10 11 10 12 12
8 76,800 +1d4 +3 10 11 10 12 12
9 150,000 +1d4 +4 9 10 9 11 11
10 270,000 +1d4 +4 9 10 9 11 11
11 390,000 +1 +5 8 9 8 10 10
12 510,000 +1 +5 8 9 8 10 10
13 630,000 +1 +6 7 8 7 9 9
14 750,000 +1 +6 7 8 7 9 9
15 870,000 +1 +7 6 7 6 8 8
THIEF SKILL TARGETS
Level 
Climb
Wall
Decipher
Doc.
Disarm
Mech.
Legerde-
main 
Listen 
Pick
Lock 
Search Stealth
1 4 6 6 6 6 5 6 5
2 4 6 5 6 6 5 5 5
3 4 6 5 5 5 5 5 5
4 3 5 5 5 5 5 5 5
5 3 5 5 5 5 4 5 4
6 3 5 4 5 5 4 4 4
7 3 5 4 4 4 4 4 4
8 2 4 4 4 4 4 4 4
9 2 4 4 4 4 3 4 3
10 2 4 3 4 4 3 3 3
11 2 4 3 3 3 3 3 3
12 2 3 3 3 3 2 3 3
13 2 3 3 3 3 2 2 2
14 2 3 2 3 2 2 2 2
15 2 2 2 2 2 2 2 2
Customising Thief Skills (Optional Rule)
The Thief Skill Targets table lists the standard skill
progression, granting a balanced advancement across
all skills. Players wishing to customise their character’s
skill advancement may use this optional rule.
Base Skill Target: All skills begin at 6.
Expertise points: Thieves gain expertise points to
improve their skills. Each point allocated to a skill
lowers the Skill Target by 1.
At Level 1: At character creation, the player may allocate
4 expertise points.
Gaining Levels: At each Level gained, the player may
allocate 2 expertise points.
Minimum Skill Target: No Skill Target may be lowered
below 2.

=== PAGE 78 ===
Part Five
Magic

=== PAGE 79 ===
M
agic. One word with so many meanings, some true
and some false. I take umbrage that common folk
call the prayers I make to the blessed saints holy
“magic,” but such is a small suffering for those blessings. Mean-
while, arcane scholars wield eldritch formulae to bend reality
to their will, enchanters and fairies deceive with a wave of the
hand, and mosslings practise strange knacks that linger on the
edge of where craft and magic meet. Strange powers abound
in this world, good folk, and when we traffic with those powers
we do so at risk to both body and soul. Tread carefully.”
—Brother Samwise Lank, wandering friar
“

=== PAGE 80 ===
78
P a r t F i v e | m a g i c
Arcane Magic
The workings of magicians, learned by esoteric study and arduous practice.The workings of magicians, learned by esoteric study and arduous practice.
A
rcane spells take the form of patterns of magi-
cal energy imprinted into a character’s mind (a
process known as memorising a spell). When a
spell is cast, its pattern is erased from the character’s mind
until it is memorised again.
SPELL RANKS
Spells are categorised by Rank, from Rank 1 (the least
powerful) to Rank 6 (the most powerful). An arcane
spell-caster’s Level determines which Rank of spells they
are able to cast.
SPELL BOOKS
Arcane spells are recorded in grimoires, treatises, tomes,
and folios, collectively known as spell books. Arcane
spell-casters collect and jealously hoard spell books, as
these works of eldritch study are the primary source of
their power.
Languages: Spell books may be written in common
languages (e.g. Woldish, Old Woldish, Caprice, Drunic),
in obscure or dead tongues, or occasionally in ciphers or
magical script (using the Arcane Cypher spell).
LEARNING SPELLS
There are several means by which an arcane spell-caster
learns new spells, each described below.
Spell Rank: It is only possible to learn spells of a Rank the
character can memorise, according to their Class and Level.
Blank spell books: Unless learning spells by studying from
a spell book, learned spells must be written into a spell
book (see Adventuring Gear, p116). Up to three spells
may be recorded in each spell book.
Learning From a Mentor
If a character has an established relationship with an
arcane spell-caster of at least 3 Levels higher, they may be
able to consult with them to learn new spells. Learning a
new spell from a mentor takes 1 week. The mentor usually
expects a service in return, perhaps sending the character
on a quest of some kind.
Studying a Spell Book
As objects of great power, spell books are rarely found for
sale, but they may be found in treasure hoards or stolen
from rival spell-casters. To learn spells from a spell book,
the character must be able to understand the written
language (by dint of study or magic) and must spend time
attempting to learn the spells it contains.
Learning: Learning a spell from a spell book requires
1 week of quiet study per Rank of the spell. The charac-
ter must then make an Intelligence Check. If the check
succeeds, they have learned the spell and may henceforth
memorise it. If the check fails, the character may not try
to learn this spell again before gaining a Level.
Researching a New Spell
Spells may also be added to a spell book by a process of
research, requiring 2 weeks and 1,000gp per Rank of
the spell. Any arcane spell listed in this book may be
researched. Players may also sometimes wish to invent
entirely new spells. In this case, the Referee must read
the proposed spell description, decide if the spell can be
researched, and set a Rank for the spell.
Chance of failure: Spell research is not always fruitful.
There is a minimum 1-in-6 chance of failure, in which case
the invested time and money are lost.
LOST SPELL BOOKS
In the event of disaster, an arcane spell-caster can rewrite
spells they have learned into a blank spell book (see Adven-
turing Gear, p116) by a process of research. This requires
1 week and 1,000gp per Rank of spell to be rewritten. For
example, rewriting three Rank 1 spells and one Rank 2 spell
would require 5 weeks and 5,000gp.
Simple Spell Books (Optional Rule)
Groups wishing to avoid keeping track of collections of
multiple spell books may rule instead that each caster
maintains but a single book containing all the spells
they have learned. In this case, all new spells learned
are copied into the character’s spell book.

=== PAGE 81 ===
P a r t F i v e | m a g i c
79
RANK 1 ARCANE SPELLS
# Spell
1 Crystal Resonance
2 Decipher
3 Fairy Servant
4 Firelight
5 Floating Disc
6 Glyph of Sealing
7 Ignite / Extinguish
8 Ingratiate
9 Ioun Shard
10 Shield of Force
11 Vapours of Dream
12 Ventriloquism
RANK 4 ARCANE SPELLS
# Spell
1 Acid Globe
2 Arcane Eye
3 Confusion
4 Dimension Door
5 Dominate
6 Hallucinatory Terrain
7 Hex Weaving
8 Plant Growth
9 Polymorph
10 Wall of Fire
11 Wall of Ice
12 Woodland Veil
RANK 2 ARCANE SPELLS
# Spell
1 Arcane Cypher
2 Dweomerlight
3 Flaming Spirit
4 Glyph of Locking
5 Invisibility
6 Knock
7 Levitate
8 Mind Crystal
9 Mirror Image
10 Perceive the Invisible
11 Phantasm
12 Web
RANK 5 ARCANE SPELLS
# Spell
1 Air Sphere
2 Animate Dead
3 Cloudkill
4 Conjure Elemental
5 Fabricate
6 Feeblemind
7 Mire
8 Passwall
9 Sending
10 Telekinesis
11 Teleport
12 Wall of Stone
RANK 3 ARCANE SPELLS
# Spell
1 Circle of Invisibility
2 Crystal Vision
3 Dark Sight
4 Dispel Magic
5 Fireball
6 Fly
7 Haste
8 Lightning Bolt
9 Missile Ward
10 Paralysation
11 Serpent Glyph
12 Water Breathing
RANK 6 ARCANE SPELLS
# Spell
1 Anti-Magic Ward
2 Control Weather
3 Disintegrate
4 Dweomerfire
5 Geas
6 Invisible Stalker
7 Move Terrain
8 Oracle
9 Petrification
10 Project Image
11 Wave of Force
12 Word of Doom
MEMORISING SPELLS
An arcane spell-caster may memorise new spells once a
day, imprinting the energy patterns of spells they have
learned into their mind. Once memorised, a spell remains
in the character’s mind until cast.
Rest: A character can only memorise spells following a
night’s rest.
Time: Memorising spells requires 1 hour of quiet study.
Spell books: Spell books containing the spells to be memo-
rised must be to hand.
Number of spells: The maximum number of spells an
arcane spell-caster can imprint into their mind depends
on their Class and Level.
Duplicate spells: Characters capable of memorising more
than one spell of a given Rank may memorise multiple
copies of the same spell.
CASTING SPELLS
A memorised spell is cast by precisely replicating a specific
set of hand gestures and mystical words. When a spell is
cast, the imprinted pattern of magical energy is erased
from the caster’s mind until it is memorised again.
Freedom: The character must be able to speak and must
have one hand free. An arcane spell-caster cannot cast
spells if gagged, bound, or in an area of magical silence.
In combat: Casting a spell counts as the character’s action
in a Round, and the character may not move in the same
Round as casting a spell. The intention to cast a spell must
be declared before initiative is rolled. If the character is
harmed before their initiative, the spell is disrupted (see
Combat, p166).
Cumulative effects: If multiple spells increasing the
same statistic (e.g. bonuses to Attack, AC, damage, Saving
Throws, etc.) are cast on a single subject, only the most
powerful has effect.

=== PAGE 82 ===
80
P a r t F i v e | m a g i c
Rank 1 Arcane Spells
The most basic spells worthy of an adventuring magician.The most basic spells worthy of an adventuring magician.
CRYSTAL RESONANCE
Duration: Special
Range: 10′
Allows the caster to attune a gem or crystal (of at least 50gp
value) to copy certain energies from the environment or
to release copied energies. The spell manifests one of the
following effects when cast:
1. Imprint: Holding the crystal aloft for 1 Turn, the caster
imprints it from the surroundings (the area within
range). A single type of energy (see Types of Energy) may
be imprinted into the crystal. Any energy previously
absorbed into the crystal is replaced. There is a 1-in-20
chance of the crystal shattering and becoming useless.
2. Release: Causes a previously imprinted crystal to
reproduce the stored energy in the environment it now
occupies (the area within range). Released energies only
reproduce normal ambient conditions and cannot cause
damage, blindness, deafness, or other special effects.
Types of Energies
Light: The lighting qualities of an environment may be
absorbed and reproduced, causing an area of light, gloom,
shadow, and so forth to be emitted from the crystal for 1
Turn per Level of the caster.
Images: A static snapshot of the crystal’s environment
can be absorbed for later examination. The image is repro-
duced for 1 Turn.
Sound: Any sound emitted during the 1 Turn absorption
time is recorded and may be reproduced.
Temperature: Warmth or cold may be absorbed into the
crystal and re-emitted for 1 Turn per Level of the caster.
DECIPHER
Duration: 2 Turns
Range: 5′
Script which the caster passes their hand over writhes,
glows, and temporarily transforms into common Woldish
text with the same meaning.
Script: Written information in any language, including
coded messages or symbols (e.g. on treasure maps) may
be deciphered by this spell.
Instances: Multiple separate scripts can be translated
while the spell lasts, but all revert to their original form
once the duration ends.
FAIRY SERVANT
Duration: 6 Turns
Range: 30′
Summons an invisible sprite who performs the caster’s
bidding if gifted a pretty trinket (worth at least 50gp) or
a portion of magical fungus. The gift vanishes instantly.
Tasks: The sprite can manipulate small objects (e.g. open
a door, flip the pages of a book, pick up and drop a small
stone) or perform basic tasks such as cleaning or folding
clothes.
Capabilities: The sprite can fly and can carry or manipulate
objects weighing up to 80 coins. It cannot fight but may be
attacked by creatures that can see the invisible.
Fairy Servant
Small Fairy—Semi-intelligent—neutral
Level 1 AC 15 HP 1 Saves D12 R13 H14 B15 S16
Att None Fly 20 Morale 12 XP 10
FIRELIGHT
Duration: 6 Turns + 1 Turn per Level
Range: The caster
Conjures a ball of flickering flame around the caster’s hand,
floating above their shoulder, or around object held.
Light: The flame sheds light in a 15′ radius, sufficient for
reading, but not as bright as daylight.
Heatless: The conjured flame does not produce heat and
cannot be used to ignite objects or cause damage.
Flare: With a magic word, the caster may command the
flame to flare suddenly. All within 30′ who see the flare
must Save Versus Spell or be dazzled, suffering a –2 penalty
to Attack Rolls for 1d4 Rounds. The caster is not affected
by the flare, but allies may be unless warned to close their
eyes. After flaring, the flame disappears and the spell ends.
FLOATING DISC
Duration: 6 Turns
Range: 6′
Conjures a disc of magical force that can carry loads. The
disc is invisible, but the caster can sense its location.
Dimensions: The disc is shaped like a round shield—about
3′ across and slightly concave.
Load: The disc can hold up to 5,000 coins of weight.
Motion: The disc floats at waist height, following the caster
as they move.
Expiration: Anything placed on the disc is dropped when
it disappears at the end of the spell’s duration.

=== PAGE 83 ===
P a r t F i v e | m a g i c
81
GLYPH OF SEALING
Duration: 2d6 Turns
Range: 30′
A glowing rune appears on a single closed door, gate, lid, or
similar portal of the caster’s choosing, magically prevent-
ing it from being opened.
Opening by magic: A Knock spell opens the sealed portal
instantly, dispelling the Glyph of Sealing.
Opening by force: Creatures 3 Levels or more above the
caster can open the sealed portal with 1 Round of effort.
IGNITE / EXTINGUISH
Duration: Instant
Range: 30′
Manifests one of the following effects when cast:
1. Ignite: One stream of sparks per Level of the caster
shoots from the caster’s hand toward one or more
targets. Targeted light sources are ignited. Targeted
creatures must Save Versus Ray or suffer 1 damage per
stream of sparks directed at them.
2. Extinguish: Whirling zephyrs instantly snuff out up to
one flame per Level of the caster. Flames up to the size
of a burning torch may be affected. If a flame is held by
a creature, they may Save Versus Spell to prevent the
flame from being extinguished.
INGRATIATE
Duration: 3 Turns
Range: Object touched
Enchants a small object with the power to charm a person
who willingly accepts it as a gift.
Recipient: A single mortal, fairy, or demi-fey who accepts
the enchanted object must Save Versus Spell or be
charmed.
Restrictions: Large creatures or those of below Sentient
intelligence are immune.
Charm duration: The charm lasts indefinitely, but the
subject makes a further Save Versus Spell once per day. If
one of these saves succeeds, the charm ends.
Friendship: The subject regards the caster as a close friend
and comes to the caster’s defence.
Commands: If they share a language, the caster may give
the charmed subject commands, which they obey.
Resisting commands: Subjects resist commands that
contradict their habits or Alignment. Suicidal or clearly
harmful commands are always refused.
IOUN SHARD
Duration: 2 Turns
Range: 120′
Conjures a glowing shard of vividly coloured crystal that
slowly orbits the caster’s head at a distance of 1′. At the
time of casting or at any point in the spell’s duration, the
caster may choose to fire the shard at a visible target within
range.
Hit: The shard hits the target without fail (no Attack Roll
or Saving Throw).
Damage: The shard inflicts 1d6+1 damage.
One use: Once fired, the shard is destroyed.
At higher Levels: Higher-Level casters may conjure one
additional shard per 3 Levels: two at Level 4, three at Level
7, four at Level 10, etc. Multiple shards may be fired simul-
taneously and may be directed at a single target.
SHIELD OF FORCE
Duration: 2 Turns
Range: The caster
Conjures an invisible barrier of magical force that defends
the caster from harm, glimmering and crackling with any
deflected attacks.
Ioun shards: The barrier unfailingly deflects Ioun Shards.
Missile attacks: The barrier grants the caster AC 17.
Other attacks: The barrier grants the caster AC 15.
VAPOURS OF DREAM
Duration: Concentration, up to 1 Round per Level
Range: 240′
A roiling, violet vapour drifts from a point within range,
flowing in a direction of the caster’s choosing.
Flow: On the first Round, the vapour fills a 10′ cube around
the origin point. Each subsequent Round, it fills another 10′
cube adjacent to the origin point or to a previously filled
area.
Concentration: If the caster is harmed, moves, or takes any
other action, the spell ends.
Dissipation: The vapour dissipates when the spell ends.
Effects: Living creatures of Level 4 or lower inside the
vapour must Save Versus Spell or fall into a deep sleep
filled with delirious dreams, lasting for 4d4 Turns.
Killing: A single attack with a bladed weapon kills a sleep-
ing creature enchanted by the vapour.
Awakening: Enchanted creatures can be forcefully awak-
ened (e.g. by slapping).
VENTRILOQUISM
Duration: 2 Turns
Range: 60′
The caster’s voice emanates from anywhere within range
(e.g. a statue, a tapestry, an animal).

=== PAGE 84 ===
82
P a r t F i v e | m a g i c
Rank 2 Arcane Spells
Spells of significant utility to the adventuring magician.Spells of significant utility to the adventuring magician.
ARCANE CYPHER
Duration: Permanent
Range: 5′
Script which the caster passes their hand over glows and
is transformed into arcane sigils incomprehensible to all
except the caster.
Volume: The text of a single spell in a spell book may be
affected, or up to 1 page of normal text per Level of the
caster. Magical text cannot be affected.
Deciphering: The Arcane Cypher is only decoded by magic
(e.g. by the Decipher spell).
DWEOMERLIGHT
Duration: 6 Turns
Range: 30′
Magical energy within range glows in scintillating colours.
Magic items and enchantments: Magic items and areas,
objects, or creatures under the influence of magic are
caused to glow.
Spell-casting: Spells produce vivid streaks of light, irrefu-
tably indicating the source and target.
Memorised spells: The imprinted energy patterns of
memorised arcane spells glow, surrounding arcane
spell-casters’ heads with a halo of rainbow hues.
FLAMING SPIRIT
Duration: 1 Round per Level
Range: 60′
Conjures a whirling streak of crackling, white flame that
whisks to and fro at the caster’s command.
Directing: Each Round, the caster may command the flame
to streak towards a target within 30′ of its current location.
The target must Save Versus Ray or suffer 1d6 damage.
GLYPH OF LOCKING
Duration: Permanent
Range: 30′
A glowing rune appears on a single closed door, gate, lid, or
similar portal of the caster’s choosing, magically locking it.
Rune: The rune becomes invisible 1 Turn after casting but
may be detected by magic (e.g. Dweomerlight, Perceive the
Invisible).
Bypassing: The caster may temporarily bypass or perma-
nently end the spell at will.
Password: The caster may specify a password, allowing
others to pass through the locked portal.
Higher-Level casters: Arcane spell-casters 3 or more Levels
higher than the caster of the Glyph of Locking may pass
through the locked portal.
Knock spells: Disable the Glyph of Locking for 1 Turn.
INVISIBILITY
Duration: 1 hour per Level
Range: 240′
The caster (or another creature or object of the caster’s
choosing) shimmers and disappears from sight.
If cast on a creature: Any gear the subject is carrying is also
rendered invisible (this includes clothing and armour).
Items subsequently put down become visible. If the subject
attacks or casts a spell, the invisibility is broken and the
spell ends.
Light sources: If a light source is made invisible (either as
part of a creature’s gear or as an individual object), the light
it casts is unaffected.
KNOCK
Duration: Instant
Range: Door or portal touched
The caster knocks on a single closed door, gate, lid, or simi-
lar portal with their hand or a staff. The portal groans,
grumbles, and magically opens.
Locks and bars: Are unlocked or removed.
Magical seals: Glyphs of Sealing are dispelled. Other magi-
cal seals (e.g. Glyphs of Locking) are disabled for 1 Turn.
Secret doors: May be opened, but they must be known to
the caster.

=== PAGE 85 ===
P a r t F i v e | m a g i c
83
LEVITATE
Duration: 6 Turns +1 per Level
Range: The caster
Untethered from the force of gravity, the caster may move
up and down through the air at will.
Vertical movement: Up to 20′ per Round.
Horizontal movement: The caster can move laterally by
pushing against solid objects (e.g. a ceiling).
Weight: The caster can carry a normal amount of weight
while levitating.
MIND CRYSTAL
Duration: 12 Turns
Range: 60′
Attunes a gem or crystal (of at least 250gp value) to the
subtly radiating energies of living minds, allowing the
caster to detect the presence of creatures and perceive
their thoughts.
Focus for 1 Turn: To pick up thoughts, the caster must
hold the crystal aloft and focus their concentration in a
particular direction for 1 Turn without moving.
After 1 Turn: The crystal projects the thoughts of all crea-
tures within range in the chosen direction into the caster’s
mind.
Multiple creatures: If multiple creatures are within range
in the direction being focused on, the caster perceives an
incomprehensible mix of all their thoughts. If the caster
focuses for an additional Turn, they can isolate a single
creature’s thoughts.
Obstructions: This spell is blocked by 2′ of rock or a thin
layer of lead.
MIRROR IMAGE
Duration: 6 Turns
Range: The caster
In a brief flash of prismatic light, 1d4 illusory images of the
caster appear.
Behaviour: The mirror images look and behave exactly as
the caster, remaining within 3′.
Speech and spells: The caster’s voice, as well as any subse-
quent spells cast, emanate randomly from one of the
mirror images or the caster’s true form.
Attacks on the caster: Destroy one of the mirror images
(even if the attack misses).
PERCEIVE THE INVISIBLE
Duration: 6 Turns
Range: 10′ per Level
Invisible creatures and objects in range become visible to
the caster, outlined in glittering gold.
PHANTASM
Duration: Concentration
Range: 240′
A silent, translucent illusion of the caster’s choosing mani-
fests in a 20′ cube area. Three types of illusions may be
created:
1. A scene: Either changing the appearance of the affected
area or creating the appearance of something new in the
area. The scene disappears if touched.
2. An illusory attack: For example, an avalanche, a falling
ceiling, an offensive spell, etc.
3. An illusory monster: Of Level no greater than the cast-
er’s. The monster may be directed to attack, having all
its normal capabilities and attack forms. It has Armour
Class 10 and vanishes if hit in combat.
Viewing: The illusion insinuates its way into the minds of
those who look upon it. Viewers must Save Versus Spell or
believe the illusion to be real, even if others claim it to be
unreal. Those who make the save perceive the illusion as
a lifeless, translucent image.
Illusions from imagination: If the illusion is of something
the caster has not personally seen, viewers gain a +4 bonus
to their save.
Damage: Illusory attacks and monsters may appear to
inflict damage, but no real damage or permanent effects
are ever inflicted. A character who appears to die actually
falls unconscious, a character turned to stone is actually
temporarily paralysed, and so on. Illusory damage and
effects last for 1d4 Turns.
Concentration: If the caster is harmed, moves, or takes any
other action, the spell ends.
WEB
Duration: 2 Turns per Level
Range: 30′
Conjures a volume of sticky webbing, blocking a 10′ cube
area.
Entanglement: Gluey fibres entangle creatures caught
inside the web’s area. Creatures who run into the web also
become entangled. Entangled creatures cannot move.
Breaking free: Characters with Strength below 13 cannot
break free. Those with Strength 13 or above can break
free in 1d4 Turns. Large creatures of greater than human
Strength can break free in 1d4 Rounds.
Flammable: The web can be destroyed by fire in 2 Rounds.
Creatures caught within flaming webs suffer 1d6 damage.

=== PAGE 86 ===
84
P a r t F i v e | m a g i c
Rank 3 Arcane Spells
Spells of great potency wielded by experienced magicians.Spells of great potency wielded by experienced magicians.
CIRCLE OF INVISIBILITY
Duration: 1 hour per Level
Range: 120′
A selected creature and all creatures within 10′ of it shim-
mer and disappear from sight.
Mobile area: The 10′ radius circle of the spell’s effect moves
with the chosen creature.
Exiting the area: Subjects that move more than 10′ away
from the chosen creature become visible.
Entering the area: Creatures that move into the area after
the spell is cast do not become invisible.
Gear: Any gear a subject is carrying is also rendered invis-
ible (this includes clothing and armour). Items subse-
quently put down become visible. Carried light sources
become invisible but the emitted light does not.
Breaking the invisibility: If a subject attacks or casts a
spell, the invisibility is broken for that subject.
CRYSTAL VISION
Duration: 12 Turns
Range: 60′
Attunes a gem or crystal (of at least 500gp value) to pick
up the visual impressions of living creatures, allowing the
caster to see through others’ eyes.
Focus for 1 Turn: To establish a connection with a crea-
ture, the caster must gaze into the crystal and focus their
concentration in a particular direction for 1 Turn without
moving.
After 1 Turn: Facets of the crystal reflect silent images
of the current visual perceptions of one creature within
range.
Multiple creatures: If multiple creatures are within range
in the direction being focused on, the crystal connects
with the closest.
Switching: Once a connection is established, the caster
may choose to maintain it or to change to another subject.
Obstructions: This spell is blocked by 2′ of rock or a thin
layer of lead.
DARK SIGHT
Duration: 1 day
Range: The caster or a creature touched
The subject gains the ability to see normally in darkness
up to 60′.
DISPEL MAGIC
Duration: Instant
Range: 120′
All spell effects in a 20′ cube within range are unravelled,
disintegrating in coils of coloured energy.
Caster Levels: Effects created by lower Level casters are
automatically dispelled. There is a 5% chance per Level
difference that a higher-Level caster’s magic resists the
attempt to dispel it and persists.
Magic items: Are unaffected.
Curses: Those incurred by a spell (e.g. Hex Weaving) are
affected. Those incurred by a magic item are unaffected.
FIREBALL
Duration: Instant
Range: 240′
Flame streaks from the caster’s finger towards a point
within range and detonates in a roaring 20′ radius sphere
of fire.
Damage: Creatures caught in the fireball suffer 1d6 damage
per Level of the caster, with a successful Save Versus Blast
indicating half damage.
FLY
Duration: 1d6 Turns +1 per Level
Range: The caster or a creature touched
Commands the wind to service, wrapping the subject in
swirling zephyrs that lift them through the air.
Free movement: The subject can command the zephyrs to
carry them through the air in any direction, including the
ability to levitate and to hover in mid-air.
Speed: The subject can fly at Speed 120.

=== PAGE 87 ===
P a r t F i v e | m a g i c
85
HASTE
Duration: 3 Turns
Range: 240′
The spirits of up to 24 creatures (of the caster’s choosing)
in a 30′ radius are quickened, enabling them to move and
act twice as quickly as normal.
Movement: Subjects’ Speed is doubled.
Attacks: Subjects make twice the normal number of
attacks per Round.
Spells and magic items: The number of spells a subject
may cast per Round is not doubled. Likewise, the use of
magic items such as wands is not doubled.
LIGHTNING BOLT
Duration: Instant
Range: 180′
A bolt of lightning 60′ long and 5′ wide streaks from a point
within range.
Damage: Creatures caught in the lightning bolt suffer
1d6 damage per Level of the caster, with a successful Save
Versus Ray indicating half damage.
Bouncing: If the lightning bolt hits a solid barrier before
its full length is reached, it is reflected and travels for any
remaining distance of its full length in the direction of
the caster.
MISSILE WARD
Duration: 12 Turns
Range: 30′
Places a warding dweomer upon a single subject in range,
providing complete protection from normal missiles,
which shatter or splinter 1″ away from the subject’s flesh.
Warding: The subject is completely unharmed by normal-
sized, non-magical missiles (e.g. arrows, sling stones,
spears).
Other missiles: No protection is granted against gargan-
tuan missiles (e.g. hurled boulders) or enchanted missiles.
PARALYSATION
Duration: 6 Turns
Range: 60′
A number of creatures within a 20′ cube are afflicted with
the terrifying phantasm of being paralysed (aware but
unable to move or act).
Number of creatures affected: Creatures whose Levels
total up to twice the caster’s Level. Creatures of the lowest
Level are affected first. For example, if a Level 4 caster
targets a group of four Level 1 and five Level 2 creatures,
all four Level 1 creatures and two of the Level 2 creatures
are affected (a total of 8 Levels).
Resisting: Each target may Save Versus Hold to resist the
phantasm.
Restrictions: Mindless creatures are unaffected.
Cancelling: The caster may cancel the spell at will.
SERPENT GLYPH
Duration: Permanent until triggered
Range: Touch
The caster traces a magical, serpent-shaped warding glyph
upon a page of text or a surface, followed by a sprinkling
of powdered amber (100gp value).
Cast on a text: The glyph quickly mingles into the script.
It can only be detected by magic. Reading the page triggers
the warding magic.
Cast on a surface: The glyph remains visible, glowing pale
yellow. Touching the surface triggers the warding magic.
When triggered: A glowing, serpent-like form leaps from
the glyph and makes a single attack against the nearest
creature. Its Attack is equal to the caster’s Level.
If the attack hits: The victim is frozen in a glittering amber
bubble of time distortion for 1d4 days (or until dispelled
or released by the caster). While trapped, the victim is in
temporal stasis and cannot move, perceive, think, or act.
Likewise, the bubble cannot be moved or penetrated.
If the attack misses: The serpent dissipates with a flash, a
bang, and a puff of smoke.
WATER BREATHING
Duration: 1 day
Range: 30′
Bestows the ability to breathe water upon a single subject.
Breathing air: The spell does not affect the subject’s ability
to breathe air.
Underwater movement: Swimming is not enhanced or
affected.

=== PAGE 88 ===
86
P a r t F i v e | m a g i c
Rank 4 Arcane Spells
Powerful workings of magic wielded by expert magicians.Powerful workings of magic wielded by expert magicians.
ACID GLOBE
Duration: Instant
Range: 150′
A 1′ globe of potent, sickly-green acid streaks from the cast-
er’s finger and strikes a target within range.
Damage: The target suffers 1d4 damage per Level of the
caster, with a Save Versus Blast allowed for half damage. If
the save fails, the target again suffers 1d4 damage per Level
of the caster in the following Round, as the acid drips off.
Splash damage: All within 5′ of the target must also Save
Versus Blast or suffer 2d4 damage.
ARCANE EYE
Duration: 6 Turns
Range: 240′
An invisible, magical eye is conjured that allows the caster
to see at a distance.
Concentration: By concentrating, the caster can see
through the eye and can direct it to move within range
(up to 120′ per Turn).
Vision: The magical eye can see up to 60′ even in complete
darkness.
Barriers: Though invisible, the eye is tangible (as big as a
normal human eye). It cannot pass through solid barriers.
CONFUSION
Duration: 12 Rounds
Range: 120′
3d6 randomly determined creatures within a 30′ radius
area are stricken with delusions and become unable to
control their actions.
Subjects of Level 3 or greater: May Save Versus Spell each
Round to resist the spell’s effect, acting with free will that
Round if they make the Saving Throw.
Subjects of Level 2 or lower: May not make a Saving Throw.
Behaviour: Roll on the Subject Behaviour table separately
for each affected subject each Round to determine how that
subject acts that Round.
SUBJECT BEHAVIOUR
2d6 Behaviour
2–5 Attack caster’s group
6–8 No action
9–12 Attack subject’s group
DIMENSION DOOR
Duration: 1 Round
Range: 10′ / 360′
A pair of glowing, door-shaped rifts in the fabric of space
open up for a moment—one within 10′ of the caster and
the other at a chosen destination location.
Stepping through: A single creature may step through
the nearby door and instantly exit the destination door.
Transfer in the other direction is impossible.
Destination: The exit portal may be positioned in one of
two ways: either a location within 360′ known to the caster
or a location specified by a series of offsets totalling at most
360′ (e.g. 120′ north, 160′ east, 80′ up).
Occupied destination: The spell has no effect if the desti-
nation is occupied by a solid object.
Unwilling subjects: The caster may forcibly transport a
creature within 10′ by manifesting the nearby door beside
them. The target must Save Versus Hold or be sucked
through the dimensional door.
DOMINATE
Duration: Permanent until broken
Range: 120′
Places a powerful charm on one or more living creatures.
Subjects: Either 3d6 creatures of up to Level 3 or a single
creature of higher Level, as chosen by the caster. Each
subject must Save Versus Spell or be charmed.
Charm duration: The charm lasts indefinitely, but each
subject makes a further Save Versus Spell once per day. If
one of these saves succeeds, the charm ends.
Friendship: Subjects regard the caster as a close friend and
come to the caster’s defence.
Commands: If they share a language, the caster may give
the charmed subjects commands, which they obey.
Resisting commands: Subjects may resist commands that
contradict their habits or Alignment. Suicidal or clearly
harmful commands are always refused.
HALLUCINATORY TERRAIN
Duration: Permanent until touched
Range: 240′
Conjures an illusory terrain feature (e.g. a hill, wood,
marsh, etc.) or disguises an existing terrain feature.
Area: The illusion must fit completely within range.
Touching: If an intelligent being touches the illusion, it
vanishes, ending the spell.

=== PAGE 89 ===
P a r t F i v e | m a g i c
87
HEX WEAVING
Duration: Instant or permanent
Range: The caster or a creature touched
Weaving the threads of fate surrounding the subject, this
spell manifests one of the following effects when cast:
1. Removing a curse: The subject is permanently cured of
the affliction of a single curse. This spell may be used to
enable a character to discard a cursed magic item. The
duration is instant.
2. Placing a curse: The subject must Save Versus Spell or
suffer from a deleterious effect of the caster’s choosing.
Maximum possible effects include: a –2 Saving Throw
penalty, a –4 Attack Roll penalty, halving an Ability
Score. The duration is permanent.
Multiple curses: So long as each has a unique effect, multi-
ple curses may afflict the same creature.
PLANT GROWTH
Duration: Permanent
Range: 120′
A dense, thorny thicket of vines and brambles overwhelms
an area of normal woodland or scrub within range.
Area: An area of up to 3,000 square feet—selected by the
caster—is affected (e.g. 150′ × 20′, 100′ × 30′, etc.).
Passage: Large creatures can push through at half Speed.
Smaller creatures can hack through at 10′ per Turn.
POLYMORPH
Duration: 1d6 Turns + 1 Turn per Level or permanent
Range: 60′
Transforms the caster or another living subject into
another type of living creature, as chosen by the caster.
Cast on self: The transformation fails if the new form’s
Level is greater than the caster’s. The transformation does
not alter the caster’s Hit Points, Save Targets, Attack, or
intelligence. Physical capabilities of the new form (e.g.
strength, physical attack forms, modes of movement) are
acquired. Non-physical special traits or powers (e.g. immu-
nities, breath weapons, spell casting) are not acquired.
While polymorphed, the caster is unable to cast spells. The
duration is 1d6 Turns + 1 Turn per Level.
Cast on another: The transformation fails if the new form’s
Level is greater than double the caster’s. The transforma-
tion does not alter the subject’s Hit Points, but the subject
otherwise truly becomes the new form: all special traits
and powers are acquired, along with behavioural patterns,
tendencies, and intelligence. The duration is permanent.
Specific individuals: The spell cannot be used to duplicate
a specific individual.
Reversion: If the subject dies while polymorphed, they
return to their original form.
Resisting: An unwilling subject may Save Versus Spell to
resist being transformed.
WALL OF FIRE
Duration: Concentration + 1 Round per Level
Range: 60′
Conjures an opaque curtain of raging flame, shaped as the
caster wishes.
Shape: The wall is 6″ thick and forms either as a straight
line (up to 60′ long and up to 20′ high) or a ring (up to 20′
diameter and up to 20′ high).
Location: The wall cannot be created in an area occupied
by objects.
Creatures of Level 4 or greater: Can pass through the wall,
but suffer 3d6 damage (double for cold-based creatures
and undead).
Creatures of Level 3 or lower: Cannot pass the wall.
Concentration: The wall persists as long as the caster
concentrates on the spell and does not move. When
concentration ends, the wall remains for 1 Round per Level.
WALL OF ICE
Duration: 12 Turns
Range: 120′
Conjures a semi-transparent sheet of ice, shaped as the
caster wishes.
Shape: The wall is 6″ thick and forms either as a straight
line (up to 60′ long and up to 20′ high) or a ring (up to 20′
diameter and up to 20′ high).
Location: The wall must be supported (e.g. by the ground)
and cannot be created in an area occupied by objects.
Creatures of Level 4 or greater: Can break a 5′ wide hole
through the wall, given suitable tools (e.g. mining picks,
sledgehammers) and 1d6 Turns of effort. Creatures break-
ing through suffer 2d6 damage due to chunks of ice (double
for fire-based creatures).
Creatures of Level 3 or lower: Cannot break the wall.
WOODLAND VEIL
Duration: Permanent
Range: 240′
Up to 100 Small or Medium creatures (chosen by the caster)
within a 120′ radius area are veiled by illusion, appearing
as a copse of trees or an orchard.
Moving through: Once the illusion is in place, even crea-
tures moving among the veiled subjects are deceived.
Leaving the area: Subjects who leave the affected area
cease to be veiled.
Dismissing: The caster may dismiss the illusion in its
entirety at any time.

=== PAGE 90 ===
88
P a r t F i v e | m a g i c
Rank 5 Arcane Spells
Mighty spells wielded by master magicians.Mighty spells wielded by master magicians.
AIR SPHERE
Duration: 1 Turn per Level
Range: 10′ around the caster
When immersed in water, the caster is surrounded by a 10′
radius sphere of breathable air.
Mobile area: The 10′ radius sphere of the spell’s effect
moves with the caster.
Underwater movement: Swimming is not enhanced or
affected.
ANIMATE DEAD
Duration: Permanent until slain
Range: 60′
Medium humanoid corpses or skeletons of the caster’s
choosing rise as undead under the caster’s command.
Number: 1 corpse or skeleton per Level of the caster.
Stats: Whatever their capabilities during life, all created
undead use the stats below. They are unable to use any
special traits or powers (including spell casting) possessed
in life.
Duration: The reanimating magic remains active until
dispelled or until the undead are slain.
Animated Dead
meDium unDeaD—minDleSS—chaotic
Level 1 AC 12 HP 1d8 (4) Saves D12 R13 H14 B15 S16
Att Weapon (+0) Speed 20 Morale 12 XP 10
Undead: Silent before attacking. Immune to biological
effects (e.g. disease, poison) and mind-affecting spells (e.g.
Vapours of Dream, Paralysation, Dominate).
CLOUDKILL
Duration: 6 Turns
Range: 30′
A poisonous fog streams from the caster’s fingertips, filling
a 30′ diameter area in front of the caster.
Movement: The fog moves at Speed 10, driven by the wind
or, in still conditions, away from the caster.
Sinking: Because the fog is denser than air, it sinks to the
lowest point, flowing down hills, into holes, and so forth.
Damage: All creatures in contact with the fog suffer 1
damage per Round.
Creatures of Level 4 or lower: Must also Save Versus Doom
(once per Round of contact) or die.
CONJURE ELEMENTAL
Duration: Permanent until dismissed or slain
Range: 240′
Conjures a giant being formed of pure elemental matter
(air, earth, fire, or water) to do the caster’s bidding.
Materials: The spell requires a large volume of the appro-
priate element.
Concentration: If the caster is harmed, moves at greater
than half Speed, or takes any other action, their command
over the elemental ends. An elemental unchained from a
caster’s control immediately attempts to murder its crea-
tor and any who get in its way.
Dismissing: While control over the elemental is main-
tained, the caster may dismiss it at any time, returning it
to inert matter.
Elemental
large conStruct—minDleSS—neutral
Level 16 AC 21 HP 16d8 (72) Saves D2 R3 H4 B5 S6
Att Blow (+11, 3d8) Speed By type Morale 12 XP 3,050
Construct: Immune to biological effects (e.g. disease,
poison) and mind-affecting spells (e.g. Vapours of Dream,
Paralysation, Dominate).
Immunities: Only harmed by magic or magic weapons.
Air: 32′ high, 8′ wide vortex of whirling air. +1d8 damage
against flying creatures. Speed 120.
Earth: 16′ high humanoid figure of earth or stone. Cannot
cross water wider than 16′. +1d8 damage against creatures
on the ground. Speed 20.
Fire: 16′ high, 16′ wide column of whirling fire. Cannot cross
water wider than 16′. +1d8 damage against cold-based crea-
tures. Speed 40.
Water: 8′ high, 32′ wide wave of water. Must remain within
60′ of water. +1d8 damage against creatures in water. Speed
20 (swimming 60).
FABRICATE
Duration: Permanent
Range: 60′
Disassembles raw, inanimate materials within range and
weaves them into objects of the caster’s choosing.
Objects: Any simple object typically constructed from the
raw materials may be fabricated. For example, a door could
be made from trees, clothing from wool, etc.
Size of objects: Up to 1 cubic yard per Level of the caster.
For objects fabricated from minerals: up to 1 cubic foot per
Level of the caster.

=== PAGE 91 ===
P a r t F i v e | m a g i c
89
FEEBLEMIND
Duration: Permanent
Range: 240′
An arcane spell-caster within range must Save Versus Spell
(at a –4 penalty) or be severely reduced in cognitive and
magical aptitude.
Effects: Intelligence reduced to 3. Unable to think clearly
or cast spells.
MIRE
Duration: 3d6 days
Range: 120′
Transforms a surface of sand, earth, or rock into a sticky
mire of thick mud.
Area: Up to 3,000 square feet, 10′ deep.
Movement: Creatures in the mud move at 10% of their
normal Speed. For example, a creature with Speed 30 could
move 3′ per Round in the mire.
Sinking: Creatures heavy enough to sink in mud (per the
Referee’s judgement) sink at a rate of 1′ per Round, unless
able to grasp support. Completely submerged creatures
drown (see Suffocation, p154).
PASSWALL
Duration: 3 Turns
Range: 30′
A 5′ diameter hole is temporarily opened in solid rock or
stone, forming a passageway up to 10′ deep.
SENDING
Duration: Instant
Range: Unlimited
The caster sends a mental message to another creature.
Recipient: The caster must be familiar with the recipient,
including their name and appearance. The recipient must
be of at least Animal Intelligence.
Message: The message may be up to 25 words. It is under-
stood by the recipient, irrespective of language.
TELEKINESIS
Duration: Concentration (up to 6 Rounds)
Range: 120′
By concentrating, the caster is able to move an object or
creature by the power of thought.
Weight: Up to 200 coins of weight per Level of the caster.
Movement: The caster may move the target up to 20′ per
Round in any direction desired (including vertically).
Resisting: If a creature is targeted, it may Save Versus Hold
to resist the spell. If a held object is targeted, the owner may
likewise Save Versus Hold to resist the spell.
Concentration: If the caster is harmed, moves, or takes any
other action, the spell ends.
TELEPORT
Duration: Instant
Range: 10′
The caster or a chosen creature vanishes and reappears at
a location of the caster’s choosing.
Gear: The subject is teleported with all its gear, up to its
maximum load.
Resisting: An unwilling subject may Save Versus Spell to
resist the teleportation.
Destination: May be at any distance, but must be known
to the caster. The destination must be an open space at
ground level. (The caster may not intentionally teleport a
subject into mid-air or into solid matter.)
Risk: When teleporting, there is a risk of accidentally arriv-
ing above or below ground level. The chance of a successful
teleportation depends on the caster’s knowledge of the
destination (see below). Roll d100 and consult the Teleport
Result table.
Too high: The subject appears 1d10 × 10′ above the intended
destination. If this is inside solid matter, the subject dies
instantly. Otherwise, they fall from a height.
Too low: The subject appears 1d10 × 10′ below the intended
destination. If this is inside solid matter, the subject dies
instantly.
TELEPORT RESULT
Knowledge
of Dest.
Intended
Dest. 
Too High Too Low
Scant 01–50 51–75 76–00
Moderate 01–80 81–90 91–00
Exact 01–95 96–99 00
Scant: A location that the caster has visited once or twice, has
seen by magical scrying, or has heard of from descriptions.
Moderate: A location that the caster has visited often or has
studied via scrying for several weeks.
Exact: A location that the caster has studied in-person for
several weeks, memorising every minute detail.
WALL OF STONE
Duration: Permanent
Range: 60′
Conjures a wall of solid rock, shaped as the caster wishes.
Size: The wall may be of any shape, provided it does not
exceed 1,000 cubic feet of volume. (For example, a 2′ thick
wall, 50′ long and 10′ high.)
Location: The wall must be supported (e.g. by the ground)
and cannot be created in an area occupied by objects.

=== PAGE 92 ===
90
P a r t F i v e | m a g i c
Rank 6 Arcane Spells
The mightiest workings of arcane magic—the preserve of arch-magicians.The mightiest workings of arcane magic—the preserve of arch-magicians.
ANTI-MAGIC WARD
Duration: 1 Round per Level
Range: The caster
Wreathes the caster in a shimmering violet shell that nulli-
fies incoming spells with a violent flash of coloured energy.
Ward: The barrier blocks all incoming spells and spell
effects of Ranks 1–3. This includes spells cast from magic
items such as scrolls or wands.
Dispelling: Dispel Magic is effective against this spell.
CONTROL WEATHER
Duration: Concentration
Range: 720′ around the caster
Weather conditions of the caster’s choosing manifest in
the local area (see list of common conditions below).
Concentration: If the caster is harmed, moves, or takes any
other action, the spell ends.
Outdoors only: This spell only functions outdoors.
Weather Conditions
The following are common weather conditions. Others
may be possible, at the Referee’s discretion.
Calm: Clears bad weather (though side-effects—e.g. mud
after rain—remain).
Extreme heat: Dries up snow or mud (including the Mire
spell). Creatures in the area move at half Speed.
Fog: Visibility drops to 20′. Creatures in the area move at
half Speed and, at the Referee’s option, may also have a
chance of getting lost.
High winds: Creatures in the area move at half Speed.
Missile fire and flight are impossible. High winds may be
used to increase the sailing speed of ships by 50%. In sandy
areas, high winds cause sandstorms, reducing visibility
to 20′.
Rain: –2 penalty to Attack Rolls with missile weapons. Mud
forms after 3 Turns, halving Speed.
Snow: Visibility drops to 20′. Creatures in the area move at
half Speed. Bodies of water begin to freeze. After the snow
thaws, mud remains and impedes movement.
DISINTEGRATE
Duration: Instant
Range: 60′
Instantly and permanently destroys the material form of
a single, non-magical creature or object.
Targeting a creature: The victim must Save Versus Doom
to resist disintegration.
Targeting an object: The Referee decides what can be
affected, for example: a tree, a ship, a 10′ section of wall.
DWEOMERFIRE
Duration: 1 Round
Range: 60′
Prismatic flame briefly engulfs any magical energy in a
selected 20′ cube within range
Magic items and enchantments: Objects, areas, or crea-
tures under the influence of magic are wreathed in flame.
Creatures in contact suffer 1d6 damage.
Spell-casting: Subsequently cast spells explode in a confla-
gration of vivid energy. Creatures casting a spell must Save
Versus Spell or suffer 3d6 damage, rendering the cast spell
ineffective.
Memorised spells: The imprinted energy patterns of
memorised arcane spells burn the mind. Arcane spell-cast-
ers must Save Versus Spell or suffer 1 damage per memo-
rised spell.
GEAS
Duration: Permanent
Range: 30′
The caster compels a subject to perform—or avoid
performing—a specific action.
Examples: Bringing a specific item to the caster, eating or
drinking without restraint, keeping a certain fact secret.
Impossible or deadly tasks: The prescribed geas must not
be impossible or directly deadly—if such a geas is cast, it
rebounds and affects the caster instead.
Saving throw: The subject may Save Versus Spell to avoid
coming under the spell’s effect.
If the save fails: The subject must follow the stipulated
course of action or suffer gradually increasing (and eventu-
ally fatal) penalties determined by the Referee (e.g. Attack
penalties, Ability Score reductions, inability to memorise
spells, physical torment and feebleness, etc.).
Removing: Dispel Magic is ineffective against a geas.
Remove Curse and Hex Weaving only work if the caster is 2
or more Levels higher than the caster of Geas.

=== PAGE 93 ===
P a r t F i v e | m a g i c
91
INVISIBLE STALKER
Duration: One mission or until slain
Range: Summoned to caster’s presence
Summons an invisible, extra-dimensional entity to
the caster’s presence, magically binding it to perform a
mission of the caster’s choosing.
Wording: The caster must be careful with the wording of
the mission. Invisible stalkers are intelligent and treach-
erous. Unless the assigned mission can be easily and
quickly accomplished, the stalker follows the letter of the
command while twisting the intent.
Duration: The creature is bound to attempt the mission
until it succeeds or is destroyed.
Invisible Stalker
meDium monStroSity—Sentient—neutral
Level 8 AC 16 HP 8d8 (36) Saves D8 R9 H10 B11 S12
Att Crush (+7, 4d4) Speed 40 Morale 12 XP 1,040
Tracking: Without fault.
Surprise: 5-in-6, unless target can detect invisibility.
If killed: Returns to dimension of origin.
MOVE TERRAIN
Duration: 6 Turns
Range: 240′
The land bulges and warps as a terrain feature moves under
the caster’s control.
Terrain feature: A single feature (e.g. a hill, ridge, grove,
pool, etc.) contained in a 120′ square area may be moved.
Movement rate: The caster can move terrain at up to 60′
per Turn. Any buildings or creatures present move with
the terrain feature.
Concentration: The caster must concentrate (no move-
ment or other actions allowed) while moving terrain.
They may halt to perform other actions and then resume
concentration.
ORACLE
Duration: 1d6 Turns
Range: The caster
Casting this spell while burning a portion of the rare dust
Ishwagrande (1,000gp, see DCB), the caster opens a channel
of communication with an extra-dimensional intelligence.
Questions: The caster may ask three questions.
Subject: The questions must relate to a specific subject—an
object, place, or creature. The caster must be in the pres-
ence of the subject or a closely related item (e.g. the tomb-
stone of a deceased person, the sheath of a lost sword).
Answers: Questions receive a brief, cryptic answer. Each
answer has a 1-in-6 chance of being false or misleading.
Limits: Each casting of this spell takes 1d6 Turns. The spell
may be cast at most once per week.
Peril: Contact with powerful extra-dimensional beings
can shatter the caster’s mind. The caster must Save Versus
Doom with a +2 bonus or enter a coma for 1d6 weeks.
PETRIFICATION
Duration: Permanent or instant
Range: 120′
Manifests one of the following effects when cast:
1. Flesh to stone: Permanently transforms a living crea-
ture (including equipment) into stone. The victim may
Save Versus Hold to resist.
2. Stone to flesh: Restores a magically petrified creature
(and its equipment) to life.
PROJECT IMAGE
Duration: 6 Turns
Range: 240′
An illusory duplicate of the caster appears within range.
Duplicate: The image is an exact duplicate of the caster
that can only be differentiated by touch.
Subsequent spells cast: Appear to originate from the
image. (Targets must still be visible to the caster, however.)
Spells and missiles: The image appears unaffected by
spells or missile weapons.
Melee or touch: If the image is touched or hit in melee, it
disappears.
WAVE OF FORCE
Duration: 1 Round per 2 Levels
Range: 60′ in front of the caster
A repulsive force emanates from the caster’s outstretched
hands, pushing other creatures away.
Path: A 10′ wide, 60′ long path in front of the caster. The
caster may turn to affect a new path each Round.
Repulsion: All creatures in the path are pushed directly
away from the caster at 30′ per Round. Creatures attempt-
ing to move towards the caster are repelled at their Speed,
if it is greater than 30.
Concentration: The caster must concentrate (no move-
ment or other actions allowed) while repelling creatures.
They may halt to perform other actions and then resume
concentration.
WORD OF DOOM
Duration: Instant
Range: 240′
The caster announces the doom of creatures within a
selected 60′ cube.
Effect: A total of up to 4d8 Levels of creatures within the
area must Save Versus Doom or die, instantly. Creatures of
the lowest Level are affected first. For example, if four Level
3 and five Level 5 creatures are in the targeted area and the
4d8 roll results in 20, then all four Level 3 creatures and one
of the Level 5 creatures are affected (a total of 17 Levels).
Restrictions: Undead and creatures of greater than Level
7 are unaffected.

=== PAGE 94 ===
92
P a r t F i v e | m a g i c
Fairy Magic
Magic originating in the Timeless World, where all is woven with enchantment.Magic originating in the Timeless World, where all is woven with enchantment.
F
airy magic takes two forms—the glamours innate
to folk touched by Fairy and the runes guarded by
the fearsome fairy nobles.
GLAMOURS
Glamours are innately possessed by natives of Fairy and by
other folk touched by the magic that weaves throughout
that world. Though mortals regard glamours as magic,
for fairies they are as natural as breathing, speaking, or
singing.
Learning Glamours
The number of glamours known by a character is deter-
mined by their Kindred, Class, and Level.
Using Glamours
Glamours are activated by thought alone, without the need
for gesture or incantation, unless noted otherwise in a
glamour’s description.
Glamour usage frequency: Unless noted otherwise in
its description, there is no limit to the number of times a
glamour may be used per day.
In combat: Using a glamour counts as the character’s
action in a Round. The character may move in the same
Round as using a glamour. The intention to use a glamour
need not be declared before initiative is rolled, and glam-
ours cannot be disrupted (see Combat, p166).
RUNES
The fairy runes are among the deepest magical secrets of
fairy-kind. Discovered by mighty elf sorcerers in aeons
long past, the runes tap into the magical fundament of
Fairy itself. Their usage is thus governed by ancient and
immutable laws of Fairy. Fairy nobles guard the knowledge
of the runes, and only they may bestow their use upon
individuals of lesser rank.
Intangibility: Runes are intangible; they are not physical
objects and thus cannot be stolen, lost, or given to another.
Magnitude: Runes are divided into three levels of magni-
tude: lesser runes, greater runes, and mighty runes.
Learning Runes
The acquisition of runes is governed by the mercurial
whims of the fairy nobles. Whenever a character (due to
their Class) has the chance of acquiring a new rune, the
player must roll 2d6 and consult the Rune Granted table.
Level modifier: Characters of Level 3–5 gain a +1 bonus to
the 2d6 roll, characters of Level 6–9 gain a +2 bonus, and
characters of Level 10 or above gain a +3 bonus.
Other modifiers: The Referee may optionally apply addi-
tional modifiers (bonuses or penalties, usually from –2 to
+2) to the 2d6 roll, based on the character’s relationship
with the fairy nobles. For example, a character who has
thwarted an important scheme of a fairy noble may suffer
a –2 penalty.
Granted runes: New runes are typically granted by means
of a dream or vision in which the character visits the
noble’s court.
Duplicates: If a rune is granted which the character already
knows, the number of times it may be used is doubled.
Quest: At the Referee’s option, the fairy noble may require
the character to perform some deed or quest in return for
the granting of the rune.
RUNE GRANTED
2d6 Rune Granted
2 or less Fickle displeasure—no rune
3–7 1 lesser rune (randomly selected)
8–11 1 greater rune (randomly selected)
12 or more 1 mighty rune (randomly selected)
Cumulative Effects
If multiple spells (or runes or glamours) increasing
the same statistic (e.g. bonuses to Attack, AC, damage,
Saving Throws, etc.) are cast on a single subject, only
the most powerful has effect.

=== PAGE 95 ===
P a r t F i v e | m a g i c
93
Using Runes
Runes are activated by thought alone, without the need
for gesture or incantation, unless noted otherwise in a
rune’s description.
Rune usage frequency: The magical laws governing the
fairy runes place strict limits on the number of times a
rune may be used. This depends on the magnitude of the
rune (lesser, greater, or mighty) and the current Level of the
character (i.e. not the character’s Level when the rune was
granted). See the Rune Usage Frequency table.
In combat: Using a rune counts as the character’s action
in a Round, and the character may not move in the same
Round as using a rune. The intention to use a rune must
be declared before initiative is rolled. If the character is
harmed before their initiative, the rune is disrupted (see
Combat, p166).
RUNE USAGE FREQUENCY
Caster’s Current Level
Type 1–4 5–9 10+
Lesser Once per day Twice per day Thrice per day
Greater Once per Level Once per week Once per day
Mighty Once ever Once ever Once per year
Once per Level: Once this rune is cast, the character may not
cast it again until they have gained a Level.
Once ever: Once this rune is cast, the character may never cast
it again unless it is once more granted by a fairy noble.
LESSER RUNES
# Rune
1 Deathly Blossom
2 Fog Cloud
3 Gust of Wind
4 Proof Against Deadly Harm
5 Rune of Vanishing
6 Sway the Mortal Mind
GREATER RUNES
# Rune
1 Arcane Unbinding
2 Fairy Gold
3 Fairy Steed
4 Ice Storm
5 Rune of Invisibility
6 Sway the Mind
MIGHTY RUNES
# Rune
1 Dream Ship
2 Eternal Slumber
3 Rune of Death
4 Rune of Wishing
5 Summon Wild Hunt
6 Unravel Death
Quests in Fairy (Optional Rule)
If the Referee wishes, a character may be required to
journey to a noble’s court in Fairy to receive a new rune,
rather than receiving it in a dream or vision. This jour-
ney may be narrated as a downtime event between
adventures or played out as a full adventure, depending
on the preferences of the group.
Entering Fairy: The character receives a special invita-
tion from a fairy noble, allowing entrance to Fairy for a
short period via a special portal.
Passing of time: While the character journeys in Fairy,
2d20 days pass in the mortal world.
GLAMOURS
# Glamour # Glamour # Glamour
1 Awe 8 Fairy Dust 15 Seeming
2 Beguilement 9 Flame Charm 16 Silver Tongue
3 Breath of the Wind 10 Fool’s Gold 17 Subtle Sight
4 Cloak of Darkness 11 Forgetting 18 Through the Keyhole
5 Conjure Treats 12 Masquerade 19 Vanishing
6 Dancing Flame 13 Mirth and Malice 20 Walk in Shadows
7 Disguise Object 14 Moon Sight

=== PAGE 96 ===
94
P a r t F i v e | m a g i c
Glamours
The innate powers of those touched by Fairy, which mortals regard as magic.The innate powers of those touched by Fairy, which mortals regard as magic.
AWE
Duration: 1d4 Rounds
Range: 30′
The caster’s dramatic gesture and otherworldly presence
unnerve a group of mortals or animals (or a mixed group),
triggering a Morale Check.
If the Morale Check fails: Creatures whose Levels total
up to the caster’s Level are awestruck and flee the caster’s
presence for 1d4 Rounds. Creatures of the lowest Level are
affected first. For example, if a Level 6 caster targets a group
of four Level 1 and five Level 2 creatures, all four Level 1
creatures and one of the Level 2 creatures are affected (a
total of 6 Levels).
Usage frequency: Once per Turn.
BEGUILEMENT
Duration: 1d4 Rounds
Range: 30′
The caster’s words have great power over mortal minds.
A single mortal addressed by the caster must Save Versus
Spell or believe the caster’s words for a brief period.
Language: The target must understand the caster’s words.
After the duration ends: It is immediately obvious that a
magical deception has occurred.
Usage frequency: Once per day per subject.
BREATH OF THE WIND
Duration: 1d4 Rounds
Range: 30′
An enchanted flurry of wind causes dust to billow, leaves
to rustle, and so forth.
Stealth: While the wind blows, the caster moves in
complete silence, unnoticed by any listeners within range.
Usage frequency: Once per Turn.
CLOAK OF DARKNESS
Duration: Concentration / 1 Round
Range: The caster
The caster conjures an area of gloom and shadow, hiding
themselves from mundane sight.
Concentration: The Cloak of Darkness lasts as long as the
caster remains motionless and does not perform any other
actions.
Moving: Once the caster moves or performs another
action, the Cloak of Darkness lasts for 1 Round.
Usage frequency: Once per Turn.
CONJURE TREATS
Duration: Permanent
Range: Appears in the caster’s hand
With a flourishing gesture, the caster conjures a mortal’s
or animal’s favourite treat (e.g. sweets, pastries, sizzling
sausages, apples, etc.) out of thin air.
Offering to the subject: If the treat is offered to the mortal
or animal, their disposition toward the caster is improved.
Sustenance: The treats are real (not illusionary), but do not
provide genuine sustenance.
Usage frequency: Once per day per subject.
DANCING FLAME
Duration: Concentration (up to 2d6 Rounds)
Range: 60′
The caster commands a small flame (e.g. a torch, lantern,
or candle) burning within range to disconnect from its
source and float through the air.
Movement: The flame moves up to 10′ per Round.
Concentration: The caster must concentrate while using
this glamour. They may move, but they cannot perform
other actions.
When the duration ends: The flame dies out.
DISGUISE OBJECT
Duration: Until touched by another
Range: Object touched
An object touched is made to appear as something else of
similar dimensions.
Duration: The glamour lasts until the object is touched
by another being or until the caster uses this glamour on
another object.
Usage limit: The caster may disguise only one object at a
time with this glamour.
FAIRY DUST
Duration: 1 Round
Range: 30′
Motes of glittering dust fill the air around the caster,
momentarily revealing invisible objects and creatures.
Attacking: Invisible creatures revealed can be attacked
with only a –1 Attack penalty for the next Round.
Usage frequency: Once per day.

=== PAGE 97 ===
P a r t F i v e | m a g i c
95
FLAME CHARM
Duration: Concentration / Instant
Range: The caster / 10′
The caster can conjure and extinguish flame.
Conjuring flame: The caster’s fingertip is wreathed in
colourful fire, which may be used to ignite flammable
materials or to cast light in a 10′ radius. The flame remains
as long as the caster concentrates—they may move, but
they cannot perform other actions.
Extinguishing flame: With a snap of their fingers, the
caster causes a non-magical flame (up to the size of a
candle or table lamp) within 10′ to be instantaneously
extinguished. If a flame is held by a creature, they may
Save Versus Spell to prevent the flame from being extin-
guished.
FOOL’S GOLD
Duration: 1d6 minutes
Range: Coins touched
The caster makes copper coins appear as gold to gullible
mortals.
Saving Throw: Each mortal who views the glamoured
coins may Save Versus Spell to see the fairy trick for what
it is.
Usage frequency: The caster may disguise up to 20 coins
per Level per day with this glamour.
FORGETTING
Duration: Instant
Range: 30′
With a twinkle of the eye, the caster causes a single mortal
or animal to forget what they just witnessed a moment
before (the previous Round).
Saving Throw: The subject must Save Versus Spell to resist
the glamour.
Usage frequency: Once per day per subject.
MASQUERADE
Duration: Permanent until dismissed
Range: The caster
The caster disguises and alters their facial features with a
minor illusion.
Subtle features: May be switched in a moment (e.g. eye
colour, hair colour).
More dramatic changes: Take 1 Turn of concentration.
Duplicating another: It is not possible to duplicate a
specific individual using this glamour.
MIRTH AND MALICE
Duration: 1 Turn
Range: 30′
When speaking to a group of mortals, the caster can impart
a subtle sense of shared cheer or creeping discord.
Language: The targets must understand the caster’s words.
Minimum time speaking: The caster must speak to the
group of mortals for at least 1 Turn. After this time, the
glamour takes effect.
Effect: Up to one mortal per Level of the caster must Save
Versus Spell. Those who fail are strongly affected, either
expressing great affection or anger. The caster has no
control over how these feelings are directed or expressed.
When the caster stops speaking: The imparted emotion
dissipates within 1 Turn.
Usage frequency: Once per day per group.
MOON SIGHT
Duration: Permanent (always active)
Range: The caster
The caster can see in darkness up to 60′, viewing the world
as though it glows in faint moonlight.
Acuity: This does not incur low light penalties (p150), but
fine detail (e.g. writing) cannot be perceived.
SEEMING
Duration: Permanent until touched
Range: The caster
The caster may make their garb appear as they wish.
Touching: The glamour is only visual, and is dispelled by
touch.

=== PAGE 98 ===
96
P a r t F i v e | m a g i c
SILVER TONGUE
Duration: 1 day
Range: The caster
By using ancient modes of the immortal tongue of Fairy,
the caster is able to communicate with any being, includ-
ing mundane animals.
Usage frequency: This glamour may only be used to
communicate in one language per day (e.g. one mortal
tongue or the speech of one animal species).
SUBTLE SIGHT
Duration: Permanent (always active)
Range: The caster
The caster can sometimes spot invisible creatures or
objects, perceiving them as a faint, shimmering outline.
Chance of spotting: There is a 3-in-6 chance of the caster
noticing invisible creatures or objects in their line of sight.
The Referee should roll this chance secretly.
In combat: The caster may attack an invisible creature they
have spotted with a only –1 Attack penalty.
THROUGH THE KEYHOLE
Duration: Instant
Range: Door touched
The caster may step through any door with a keyhole, peep-
hole, or other small aperture, disappearing for an instant
then reappearing on the other side.
Magically sealed doors: Thwart this glamour, unless the
caster makes a successful Save Versus Spell.
Usage frequency: Once per day per door.
VANISHING
Duration: 1d3 Rounds
Range: 60′
The caster briefly disappears from the sight of a selected
creature within range.
Equipment and clothing: Any gear the caster is carry-
ing is also rendered invisible (this includes clothing and
armour). Items subsequently put down become visible. If
the caster is carrying a light source, the light it casts is not
rendered invisible.
Attacking: If the caster attacks the selected creature, they
are rendered visible.
Usage frequency: Once per day per subject.
WALK IN SHADOWS
Duration: 1 Round
Range: The caster
Few can perceive the circuitous pathways between worlds
that exist in shadows. The caster can walks these paths,
seemingly vanishing into shadow and, moments later,
reappearing at a different location.
Locating a shadow door: Not all areas of darkness contain
suitable shadow doors. Using this glamour, the caster can
scan a 10′ × 10′ area of darkness. There is a 2-in-6 chance
of discovering a shadow door that the caster may step
through.
Stepping through: Stepping through a discovered shadow
door, the caster disappears for 1 Round, then reappears at
a random shadowy location within 60′.

=== PAGE 99 ===
P a r t F i v e | m a g i c
97
Lesser Runes
The commonest of the fairy runes, usable on a daily basis.The commonest of the fairy runes, usable on a daily basis.
DEATHLY BLOSSOM
Duration: 1 Turn or until used
Range: Appears in caster’s hand
An exquisite white rose is conjured in the caster’s hand.
Proffering the rose: One who smells the rose must Save
Versus Doom or fall into a deep faint—appearing dead—
for 1d6 Turns.
Duration: The flower remains in existence until it is used
or 1 Turn passes.
Restrictions: Only living creatures are affected.
FOG CLOUD
Duration: 1 Turn
Range: 20′ around the caster
A cloud of roiling vapour surrounds the caster, filling a 20′
radius area at the location where the rune is used.
Vision: The fog blocks the mundane vision of all save the
caster who conjured it.
Strong winds: Gusts and gales clear the fog before the
rune’s duration has expired.
GUST OF WIND
Duration: 1 Round
Range: 10′ wide area, 60′ long
A forceful blast of air rushes from the caster’s outstretched
hands, blowing over light objects in its course.
Flames: Small, exposed flames (e.g. candles, torches) are
extinguished. Small, protected flames (e.g. lanterns) dance
wildly and have a 3-in-6 chance of going out.
Fog: The wind scatters natural and magical mists.
Creatures: Small and Medium creatures are unable to
move into the wind and must Save Versus Hold or be
pushed back 1d3 × 10′.
PROOF AGAINST DEADLY
HARM
Duration: 2d6 Rounds
Range: The caster
The caster is rendered completely immune to damage from
one specific type of weapons (e.g. swords, bows, claws, etc.),
selected when the rune is activated.
Magical / cold iron weapons: Enchanted weapons, cold
iron weapons, and the attacks of magical creatures still
harm the caster.
RUNE OF VANISHING
Duration: 1 Turn
Range: The caster
The caster is rendered invisible to the sight of mortals and
animals.
Equipment and clothing: Any gear the caster is carry-
ing is also rendered invisible (this includes clothing and
armour). Items subsequently put down become visible. If
the caster is carrying a light source, the light it casts is not
rendered invisible.
Attacking: If the caster attacks while under the effects of
this rune, they are rendered momentarily visible. Oppo-
nents may attack the caster in the same Round or the
following Round, but suffer a –2 Attack penalty.
SWAY THE MORTAL MIND
Duration: 1 day
Range: 30′
A single mortal must Save Versus Spell or be charmed by
fairy magic.
Restrictions: Only mortals of Small or Medium size and
Sentient intelligence or greater may be affected.
Friendship: The subject’s mind is swayed such that they
regard the caster as a close friend and come to the caster’s
defence.
Commands: If they share a language, the caster may give
the charmed subject commands, which they obey.
Resisting commands: The subject resists commands that
contradict their habits or Alignment. Suicidal or clearly
harmful commands are always refused.

=== PAGE 100 ===
98
P a r t F i v e | m a g i c
Greater Runes
Fairy runes of great power and wide utility.Fairy runes of great power and wide utility.
ARCANE UNBINDING
Duration: Instant
Range: 120′
All magical effects of arcane or fairy origin in a 20′ cube
are negated.
Spells, glamours, and runes: Effects created by lower or
equal Level casters automatically end. Effects created by
higher Level casters are unaffected.
Magic items: Are rendered ineffective for 1 Turn.
Holy magic: Spells and magic items of holy origin are unaf-
fected.
FAIRY GOLD
Duration: 1d6 hours
Range: Appears on the caster’s person
This rune conjures a leather bag of 2d100 gold pieces from
the vaults of the fairy noble who granted it. When the dura-
tion expires, the coins are whisked back to Fairy.
FAIRY STEED
Duration: Until dawn
Range: Appears in the caster’s presence
A dashing fairy horse—fleet of foot and charming of wit—
is summoned to serve the caster.
Commands: The fairy horse serves the caster as a mount or
in any other capacity. It will not obey suicidal commands.
Fairy Steed
large Fairy—Sentient—neutral
Level 2 AC 13 HP 2d8 (9) Saves D12 R13 H14 B15 S16
Att None Speed 80 Morale 8 XP 20
ICE STORM
Duration: Instant
Range: 120′
A violent maelstrom of hail and sleet descends on a 30′
diameter area.
Damage: All within the storm suffer 3d8 damage.
Icy surface: The surface of the ground where the storm
hit remains icy for 1 Turn. Creatures walking through the
area must move at half their normal Speed in order to
avoid slipping.
RUNE OF INVISIBILITY
Duration: 1 day
Range: The caster
The caster is rendered invisible to the sight of all beings.
Equipment and clothing: Any gear the caster is carry-
ing is also rendered invisible (this includes clothing and
armour). Items subsequently put down become visible. If
the caster is carrying a light source, the light it casts is not
rendered invisible.
Attacking: If the caster attacks while under the effects of
this rune, they are rendered momentarily visible. Oppo-
nents may attack the caster in the same Round or the
following Round, but suffer a –2 Attack penalty.
Becoming visible: The caster may choose to become visi-
ble at any time, ending the rune’s effect.
SWAY THE MIND
Duration: 1 day
Range: 30′
A single creature of any kind—person, beast, or monster—
must Save Versus Spell or be charmed by fairy magic. Fair-
ies gain a +4 bonus to the save.
Friendship: The subject’s mind is swayed such that they
regard the caster as a close friend and comes to the caster’s
defence.
Commands: If they share a language, the caster may give
the charmed subject commands, which they obey.
Resisting commands: The subject resists commands that
contradict their habits or Alignment. Suicidal or clearly
harmful commands are always refused.

=== PAGE 101 ===
P a r t F i v e | m a g i c
99
Mighty Runes
The most secret and potent fairy runes, sternly guarded by the lords of Fairy.The most secret and potent fairy runes, sternly guarded by the lords of Fairy.
DREAM SHIP
Duration: 1 Turn
Range: Appears in the caster’s presence
A phantasmagoric galleon sails down from the sky and
docks as close to the caster as is possible.
Passengers: The caster and up to 12 companions may board
the ship.
Travel: The ship ferries the caster and companions off to
any named destination within Dolmenwood.
The voyage: The passengers experience a delightful
voyage aboard the ship, drifting through a dream land
of pink clouds and cavorting sylphs. The voyage seems to
take 1d6 hours.
Duration: Whatever the perceptual time aboard, the jour-
ney takes a mere ten minutes of real time.
ETERNAL SLUMBER
Duration: Permanent
Range: 20′
A mortal within range is placed into a state of stasis and
eternal sleep.
Awakening: The subject may only be awoken by dispelling
the rune’s magic or by a condition set by the caster.
RUNE OF DEATH
Duration: Instant
Range: 120′
Invoking the power of this rune brings death upon one or
more mortals or animals within a 30′ diameter area.
Effect: A total of up to 4d8 Levels of mortals or animals
must Save Versus Doom or die, instantly. Creatures of the
lowest Level are affected first.
Restrictions: Mortals or animals of Level 8 or above are
unaffected.
RUNE OF WISHING
Duration: Permanent
Range: Unlimited
This rune has the power to alter the nature of reality in any
conceivable way the caster wishes.
Limits and adjudication: The Referee should refer to the
guidelines in the DCB—see Wishes under Magic Items.
Life force: Using this rune saps the caster’s life force, caus-
ing a permanent loss of 1d3 Constitution, which cannot be
restored by any means. A character reduced to 0 Constitu-
tion dies and can never be resurrected.
SUMMON WILD HUNT
Duration: 1d6 hours or until successful
Range: Appears in the caster’s presence
This rune invokes the blasting of ghostly horns, summon-
ing forth a hunting host from the wild woods of Fairy.
Composition: The wild hunt is composed as follows: 4d6
fairy hounds, 4d20 elf hunters on foot, 4d20 elf hunters
mounted on fairy horses, 1d6 goblin horn-blowers.
Hunting: The caster may direct the fairy host to chase a
specific quarry.
Duration: The host remains in the mortal world until the
hunt is successful, or until 1d6 hours have passed.
Elf Hunter
meDium Fairy—Sentient—neutral
Level 1 AC 12 HP 1d8 (4) Saves D12 R13 H14 B15 S16
Att Shortbow (+0, 1d6, range 50′/100′/150′) or shortsword
(+0, 1d6) Speed 40 Morale 9 XP 10
Fairy Steed
large Fairy—Sentient—neutral
Level 2 AC 13 HP 2d8 (9) Saves D12 R13 H14 B15 S16
Att None Speed 80 Morale 8 XP 20
Fairy Hound
Small Fairy—Semi-intelligent—neutral
Level 1 AC 12 HP 1d8 (4) Saves D12 R13 H14 B15 S16
Att Bite (+0, 1d6) Speed 50 Morale 8 XP 10
Goblin Hornblower
Small Fairy—Sentient—neutral
Level 1 AC 12 HP 1d8 (4) Saves D12 R13 H14 B15 S16
Att Dagger (+0, 1d4) Speed 40 Morale 8 XP 10
UNRAVEL DEATH
Duration: Instant
Range: Touch
A deceased mortal, demi-fey, or fairy whom the caster
touches returns to life.
Time limit: The power of this rune restores life to a person
who has been dead no longer than 7 days.
Weakness: Returning from death is an ordeal. Until the
subject gets 2 full weeks of bed rest, they have 1 Hit Point,
move at half Speed, cannot carry heavy items, and cannot
attack, cast spells, make Skill Checks, or use other Class
capabilities. Recovery from this weakness cannot be
hastened by magic of any kind.

=== PAGE 102 ===
100
P a r t F i v e | m a g i c
Holy Magic
The spells bestowed upon devoted adherents of the Pluritine Church.The spells bestowed upon devoted adherents of the Pluritine Church.
H
oly spells take the form of blessings bestowed
upon characters by the grace of the saints of the
Pluritine Church. When a spell is cast, the bless-
ing expires until it is bestowed again.
Major and minor saints: Among the one hundred saints
venerated in Dolmenwood, thirty-four are primary and
have the power to bestow blessings upon those who pray
to them, each being associated with a specific spell. Certain
minor saints only bestow a blessing on those who pray
at their dedicated shrines, granting less common spells
outside of the standard holy spell list.
Saintly legends and patronages: The primary legend of
each saint is recounted beside the associated spell, along
with a list of the saint’s areas of patronage (minor patron-
ages listed in parentheses).
SPELL RANKS
Spells are categorised by Rank, from Rank 1 (the least
powerful) to Rank 5 (the most powerful). A holy spell-cast-
er’s Level determines which Rank of spells they are able
to cast.
PRAYING FOR SPELLS
A holy spell-caster may pray to the saints once per day,
receiving their blessings in the form of spells. Once
bestowed, a blessing remains with the character until the
spell is cast.
Rest: A character can only pray for spells following a
night’s rest.
Time: Praying for spells requires 1 hour of quiet prayer.
Number of spells: The maximum number of spells that
can be bestowed on a holy spell-caster at one time depends
on their Class and Level.
Spell selection: When praying for spells, a holy spell-caster
may choose any holy spell of appropriate Rank listed in
this book.
Duplicate spells: Characters capable of casting more than
one spell of a given Rank may pray for multiple copies of
the same spell.
PRAYING AT SHRINES
Shrines dedicated to specific saints are scattered through-
out Dolmenwood. A holy spell-caster who prays for 1 hour
at such a shrine earns the blessing of the saint in the form
of an additional spell. Once bestowed, a blessing remains
with the character until the spell is cast. The DCB has full
details on praying at shrines.
CASTING SPELLS
A bestowed spell may be cast by reciting a prayer in the
Liturgic tongue. When a spell is cast, the saint’s blessing
expires until it is bestowed again.
Speech: The character must be able to speak. A holy spell-
caster cannot cast spells if gagged or in an area of magical
silence.
In combat: Casting a spell counts as the character’s action
in a Round, and the character may not move in the same
Round as casting a spell. The intention to cast a spell must
be declared before initiative is rolled. If the character is
harmed before their initiative, the spell is disrupted (see
Combat, p166).
Cumulative effects: If multiple spells increasing the
same statistic (e.g. bonuses to Attack, AC, damage, Saving
Throws, etc.) are cast on a single subject, only the most
powerful has effect.

=== PAGE 103 ===
P a r t F i v e | m a g i c
101
RANK 1 HOLY SPELLS
# Spell Associated Saint Name of Prayer
1 Detect Evil St Whittery St Whittery’s Vision
2 Detect Magic St Thorm Wisdom of St Thorm
3 Frost Ward St Abthius St Abthius’ Rebuke
4 Lesser Healing St Lillibeth Breath of St Lillibeth
5 Light St Foggarty St Foggarty’s Benediction
6 Mantle of Protection St Benester St Benester’s Word
7 Purify Food and Drink St Gretchen St Gretchen’s Sublimation
8 Rally St Jorrael St Jorrael’s Counsel
RANK 2 HOLY SPELLS
# Spell Associated Saint Name of Prayer
1 Bless St Gondyw Righteousness of St Gondyw
2 Charm Serpents St Dank St Dank’s Plea
3 Find Traps St Gripe Path of St Gripe
4 Flame Ward St Hollyhock Boldness of St Hollyhock
5 Hold Person St Waylaine St Waylaine’s Reproof
6 Reveal Alignment St Willofrith St Willofrith’s Warning
7 Silence St Signis Abjuration of St Signis
8 Speak With Animals St Hamfast Speech of St Hamfast
RANK 3 HOLY SPELLS
# Spell Associated Saint Name of Prayer
1 Animal Growth St Vinicus Mercy of St Vinicus
2 Bless Weapon St Sedge Courage of St Sedge
3 Cure Affliction St Pastery St Pastery’s Blessing
4 Holy Light St Eggort Devotion of St Eggort
5 Locate Object St Keye St Keye’s Revelation
6 Remove Curse St Primula St Primula’s Grace
RANK 4 HOLY SPELLS
# Spell Associated Saint Name of Prayer
1 Circle of Protection St Faxis St Faxis’ Abjuration
2 Create Water St Quister St Quister’s Defence
3 Greater Healing St Wick Steadfastness of St Wick
4 Remove Poison St Torphia St Torphia’s Respite
5 Speak With Plants St Wort Salvation of St Wort
6 Serpent Transformation St Horace St Horace’s Requital
RANK 5 HOLY SPELLS
# Spell Associated Saint Name of Prayer
1 Communion St Elsa St Elsa’s Visitation
2 Create Food St Ponch St Ponch’s Feast
3 Holy Fire St Goodenough St Goodenough’s Rebuke
4 Holy Quest St Galaunt Righteousness of St Galaunt
5 Insect Plague St Cornice Amity of St Cornice
6 Raise Dead St Clewyd Mercy of St Clewyd

=== PAGE 104 ===
102
P a r t F i v e | m a g i c
Rank 1 Holy Spells
Minor miracles of utility to adventuring adherents of the Church.Minor miracles of utility to adventuring adherents of the Church.
DETECT EVIL
Prayer name: St Whittery’s Vision
Duration: 6 Turns
Range: 120′
The caster perceives a faint halo of wicked, grinning spirits
flickering around objects under an evil enchantment and
living beings with evil intentions.
Intent only: The caster cannot read the thoughts of crea-
tures with evil intent.
Definition of evil: The Referee must judge what is classified
as evil. Beings of Chaotic Alignment do not always have
evil intent. Traps and poisons, while potentially harmful,
are not evil.
The miracle of St Whittery of the Woods: The son of a woods-
man, Whittery was raised in a small village deep in western
Dolmenwood. A group of noble travellers, merry and fair of
face, stopped at the village inn one eve, to the delight of the
locals. Reciting his evening prayers at the village chapel, the
young Whittery was visited by a horrific vision of bloodshed
at the hands of the noble guests. He reported his vision to
the vicar, who informed the village elders. The nobles were
confronted and revealed to be fairy shape-shifters who had
planned to slay everyone in the village and roast their innards.
(As fate would have it, many years later, after Whittery had
moved to study at a distant monastery, the village was visited
once more by evil fairies, who stole the place away to Fairy,
never to be seen again by mortal eyes.) Patronages: Visions,
premonitions, (warding against fairies), (lost souls).
DETECT MAGIC
Prayer name: Wisdom of St Thorm
Duration: 2 Turns
Range: 60′
Enchanted objects, areas, or creatures within range of the
caster are wreathed in a shimmering, golden glow. Both
permanent and temporary enchantments are revealed.
The miracle of St Thorm, Faith-Smith: Wandering in Dolmen-
wood as a pilgrim, Thorm was captured by elves for daring to
trespass close to a magical door to Fairy. The young pilgrim was
cast into the dungeons of the cruel fairy Prince Mallowheart,
where he was to rot away to bones. When Mallowheart visited
the prisoner to gloat over his suffering, Thorm challenged the
fairy lord to a game of cards. The saint’s holy eyes saw through
the magical treachery which inevitably ensued (Mallowheart
being notoriously unsportsmanlike) and defeated the prince,
thus assuring his release. Patronages: Gamblers, prisoners,
(blacksmiths).
FROST WARD
Prayer name: St Abthius’ Rebuke
Duration: 6 Turns
Range: 30′
A soothing warmth comes upon all allies within range,
rebuking the malicious effects of cold and frost.
Normal cold: Subjects are untroubled by non-magical
freezing temperatures.
Save bonus: Subjects gain a +2 bonus to Saving Throws
versus cold-based effects (e.g. magic or breath attacks).
Cold-based damage: Reduce cold damage by 1 per damage
die rolled. (For example, 4d6 damage is reduced by 4.)
The miracle of St Abthius, Ever-Lustrous: Abthius came to
Dolmenwood at the command of King Thaldred II of Bracken-
wold. The Cold Prince had newly returned his frigid gaze to the
mortal world, and Abthius—renowned for his fiery sermons—
served as ambassador of the King. Gaining an audience with
the fairy court, the saint proceeded to preach the virtues of
the One True God and the host of angels. The fairies responded
only with mocking laughter, and their liege pointed his crystal
wand at the saint, casting a spell of ice about him. The saint’s
radiant beauty melted the fey frost, and he turned his back on
the Prince, damning the fairy to be vaporised in the flames of
perdition. Patronages: Ambassadors, righteous vengeance,
(courtly dances), (seamstresses), (springtime).
LESSER HEALING
Prayer name: Breath of St Lillibeth
Duration: Instant
Range: The caster or a living creature touched
The fluttering of doves’ wings and the sweet scent of blos-
som manifest as the caster recites this prayer. A living
subject receives one of the following ministrations:
1. Healing: Restores 1d6+1 Hit Points. This cannot raise
the subject’s Hit Points above the normal maximum.
2. Curing paralysis: Paralysing effects are negated.
The miracle of St Lillibeth of the Sugared Breath: Lillibeth
lived as a hermit in the deep woods, with only the company of
doves. She was slain when her cottage was attacked by maraud-
ing crookhorns, but with her last breaths, she gave ministra-
tion to six doves which had been wounded. The birds were
miraculously cured, flew hence to the chapel at Wayforough,
and told the curate of their mistress’s pious deeds. Patronages:
Doves, fowl, (virgins), (messengers).

=== PAGE 105 ===
P a r t F i v e | m a g i c
103
LIGHT
Prayer name: St Foggarty’s Benediction
Duration: 12 Turns
Range: 120′
A bobbing wisp of light floats from the caster’s palm and
manifests one of the following effects:
1. Golden radiance: Casts holy light in a 15′ radius. The
light is sufficient for reading, but is not as bright as
daylight. The spell may be cast upon an object, in which
case the golden light moves with the object.
2. Blinding a creature: A flash of divine light blinds a
Chaotic creature for the duration. The target may Save
Versus Spell to resist. (See Darkness and Blindness,
p150.)
3. Cancelling magical darkness: St Foggarty’s Benediction
may cancel a 15′ radius area of magical darkness.
The miracle of St Foggarty of the Cup: Foggarty spent his
dotage ministrating to an isolated community of peat-cutters.
When a party of pilgrims lost their way in the peat bogs one
night, Foggarty commanded the marsh lights to lead them to
safety. Patronages: Lost travellers, (peat-cutters).
MANTLE OF PROTECTION
Prayer name: St Benester’s Word
Duration: 12 Turns
Range: The caster
Invoking the name of an archangel, the caster is warded
from attacks by Chaotic creatures as well as creatures
created or summoned by magic.
AC and Saving Throw bonus: The caster gains a +1 Armour
Class and Saving Throw bonus against attacks and special
powers of affected creatures.
Magically created or summoned creatures: The prayer
additionally prevents such creatures from making
melee attacks against the caster, though they may still
make ranged attacks. If the caster engages such a crea-
ture in melee, this protection is broken (though the caster
still gains the Armour Class and Saving Throw bonuses
mentioned above).
The miracle of St Benester the Right-Believing: As a young
monk, Benester was afflicted with agues. Placing his life in
the hand of God, he left his monastery to wander the wilds.
On a seven night fast in the wilderness, Benester was assailed
by the demonic servitors of an evil sorcerer who counted the
region as his domain. Undeterred, the saint invoked the name
of the seventeen archangels and continued his prayers amid
the wailing and caterwauling of the monsters. Patronages:
Hermits, fasting, (choirboys)
PURIFY FOOD AND DRINK
Prayer name: St Gretchen’s Sublimation
Duration: Permanent
Range: Touch
The sound of distant goat bells echoes and a quantity of
poisoned, rotten, spoiled, or contaminated food and drink
is purified.
Quantity: Up to 12 portions of food and drink, in any
combination. 1 ration counts as a portion of food and 1
pint counts as a portion of drink.
The miracle of St Gretchen the Maiden: Witnessing the after-
math of a battle and the wretched gasps of the wounded, St
Gretchen enlisted a band of goat-herds to gather water from
a nearby bog. The water was black and putrid, but when the
saint passed her hallowed hands above it, it became as pure as
spring rain and soothed the woes of the wounded. Patronages:
Victims of battle, (goat-herds).
RALLY
Prayer name: St Jorrael’s Counsel
Duration: 2 Turns
Range: The caster or a creature touched
The emboldening words of this prayer reverberate in the
subject’s mind, calming them and purging them of fear.
Magically induced fear: Make a Save Versus Spell with a +1
bonus per Level of the caster to counter magical terror. This
applies to effects active when Rally is cast and subsequent
effects during the duration.
The miracle of St Jorrael, God-Friend: As a wandering mendi-
cant in her middle years, Jorrael came upon a village under the
tyrannical rule of a baron and his cruel knights. Preaching at a
village council, the saint’s words emboldened the downtrod-
den villagers, who subsequently rose up against the despot
baron and brought him and his lackeys to justice. Patronages:
The downtrodden, (beggars), (anglers).

=== PAGE 106 ===
104
P a r t F i v e | m a g i c
Rank 2 Holy Spells
Lesser miracles bestowed on experienced servants of the Church.Lesser miracles bestowed on experienced servants of the Church.
BLESS
Prayer name: Righteousness of St Gondyw
Duration: 6 Turns
Range: 60′
Accompanied by the triumphant blaring of trumpets, a
surge of divine righteousness bolsters the morale of allies
within a 20′ × 20′ area.
Bonuses: Subjects gain a +1 bonus to Attack and Damage
Rolls.
Retainers: Also gain a +1 bonus to Loyalty.
The miracle of St Gondyw, Converter of Kings: An honoured
guest at a king’s tourney, St Gondyw overheard blasphemous
words upon his host’s lips. Boldly admonishing the king,
Gondyw suggested a challenge of the might of the One True
God: if the humble scribe who accompanied Gondyw could
defeat the king’s champion in single combat, the king would
swear his fealty to the Church. The king accepted, the challenge
seeming preposterous, but was dumbstruck when the scrawny
altar-boy (with St Gondyw’s blessing) wrestled his knight to the
ground. Patronages: Scribes, (tourneys), (knights).
CHARM SERPENTS
Prayer name: St Dank’s Plea
Duration: 1d4 Rounds or 1d4 Turns
Range: 60′
This prayer hypnotises snakes; the serpents rear upright
and sway to and fro, but they never attack while charmed.
Number of snakes affected: Snakes whose Levels total up
to twice the caster’s Level. For example, a Level 3 caster
could affect three Level 2 snakes, two Level 3 snakes, etc.
The caster selects which individuals are affected.
Duration: When cast on snakes that are already attacking,
the effect lasts for 1d4 Rounds. Otherwise, it lasts for 1d4
Turns.
The miracle of St Dank of the Thorn: Venturing as a mission-
ary to a distant land, Dank came to a shrine where a serpent
demon was revered. The snake-worshippers captured the
saint and set about preparing to sacrifice him before their idol.
Suspended above a pit of writhing asps, Dank prayed for divine
aid. The snakes rose up, gnawed St Dank’s bonds loose, and led
him through a secret door to safety. Patronages: Missionaries,
(serpents), (secret passages).
FIND TRAPS
Prayer name: Path of St Gripe
Duration: 2 Turns
Range: 30′
Trapped objects and areas within range of the caster are
wreathed in an apparition of faint, flickering flames.
Magical and mechanical traps: All are revealed.
No disarm: The spell provides no assistance bypassing or
deactivating traps, only revealing their locations.
The miracle of St Gripe the Forthright: When a fire raged
across local farmlands, the young Gripe (a lowly apprentice
monk, at the time) led the fearful livestock through the woods
to escape. Only by the will of God did Gripe and his flock avoid
falling into the profusion of cruel traps that had been laid in
the woods by the local baron, a man who obsessively hunted
and killed wild animals. Patronages: Shepherds, (cowherds),
(hunters), (conflagrations).
FLAME WARD
Prayer name: Boldness of St Hollyhock
Duration: 2 Turns
Range: 30′
A puff of flour and the aroma of freshly baked bread mani-
fest around a single creature of the caster’s choosing, which
is bestowed with supernatural resistance to fire.
Normal heat: The subject is unharmed by non-magical
heat or fire.
Save bonus: The subject gains a +2 bonus to Saving Throws
versus fire-based effects (e.g. magic or breath attacks).
Fire-based damage: Reduce fire damage by 1 per damage
die rolled. (For example, 4d6 damage is reduced by 4.)
The miracle of St Hollyhock the Jubilant: As a young acolyte,
Hollyhock was standing in a village square, begging for
alms. Hearing a commotion in the local bakery, she ran to
offer her aid. She was confronted by a group of angry locals
who had pushed an old woman into the flames of the baker’s
oven, believing her to have hexed the village’s flock of geese
with wicked magic. Incensed by this unjust deed, Hollyhock
invoked the blessing of the One True God and climbed into the
oven to rescue the unfortunate woman. Patronages: Crones,
(bakers’ ovens).

=== PAGE 107 ===
P a r t F i v e | m a g i c
105
HOLD PERSON
Prayer name: St Waylaine’s Reproof
Duration: 9 Turns
Range: 180′
The caster castigates one or more mortals, fairies, or demi-
fey for their misdeeds, causing them to halt in their tracks
if they fail a Save Versus Hold. The spell may be used in
two ways:
1. Against an individual: The target’s Saving Throw is
penalised by –2.
2. Against a group: 1d4 individuals in the group are
targeted. The individuals are selected by the caster.
Restrictions: Large creatures are immune.
Paralysis: Affected targets are aware but cannot move their
limbs. They may, at the caster’s option, speak.
Freeing: The caster may free paralysed targets with a word.
The miracle of St Waylaine of the Sack: The origin of St
Waylaine is somewhat uncertain, with varying depictions of
the saint as a man and a woman. Falsely accused of treason
and tax evasion, Waylaine (then a vicar of low repute) was due
to be executed by beheading. The executioner, however, was
unable to bring the axe down upon the saint’s neck, his limbs
freezing at the apex of every strike. After the sub-executioner
and the assistant executioner experienced the same anomaly,
the saint was pardoned. Patronages: Executioners, axe-grind-
ers, (merciful lords).
REVEAL ALIGNMENT
Prayer name: St Willofrith’s Warning
Duration: Instant
Range: 30′
An angelic voice whispers in the caster’s mind, revealing
the Alignment of a selected character, monster, object, or
area within range. (Most objects and areas do not have an
Alignment, but magic items or holy places may.)
The miracle of St Willofrith the Wide: Willofrith was a tomb
robber in his younger days, desecrating ancient barrows to
relieve the deceased of their riches. One day, he unearthed
a sword of great beauty, engraved with ancient script and
bedecked with amethysts and pearls. As his hand reached out
to grasp the hilt, he received an angelic vision warning him
not to touch the weapon, for it housed a spirit of Chaos. Saved
from possession, the young thief was converted to a man of
God. Patronages: Repentance, (pie-makers), (swordsmiths).
SILENCE
Prayer name: Abjuration of St Signis
Duration: 12 Turns
Range: 180′
Raising a finger to their lips, the caster whispers a hushed
prayer to St Signis the Silent. A 15′ radius area within range
is shrouded in holy silence.
Within the area: All sound is prevented. Conversation and
spell casting are impossible.
Noise from outside: Those within the area of silence can
only hear sounds from outside it.
Casting upon a creature: Silence may be cast upon a crea-
ture, which must Save Versus Spell. If the Saving Throw
fails, the shrouded 15′ radius area of silence moves with the
target. If the Saving Throw succeeds, the spell has no effect.
The miracle of St Signis the Silent: As a young monk, Signis
sat for days on end in the abbey crypts, gazing in rapture at the
statues of the venerated saints and angels. When the abbey
was plagued with moaning phantoms, Signis merely raised his
finger calmly to his lips and the crypt where he sat fell utterly
silent. Patronages: Warding the dead, (holy silence).
SPEAK WITH ANIMALS
Prayer name: Speech of St Hamfast
Duration: 6 Turns
Range: The caster
Animals of one selected species prick up their ears to the
lilting words of this prayer. The caster can speak with all
animals of that type for the duration.
Type of animal: The spell translates for one species of
normal or giant animals at a time. Intelligent animals and
fantastic monsters are not affected.
Services: Animals which are friendly towards the caster
may be persuaded to perform a service. The service must
be within an animal’s comprehension and capabilities.
The miracle of St Hamfast, Cloud-Head: Hamfast gave
sermons to the wild beasts of the forest, converting many to
the faith. By the time of his death, Hamfast’s woodland retreat
was home to a trio of bears and some three dozen devout squir-
rels, mice, and crows. The animals spent their days studying
scripture and illuminating manuscripts. Patronages: Bears,
(weather diviners).

=== PAGE 108 ===
106
P a r t F i v e | m a g i c
Rank 3 Holy Spells
Miracles of great potency bestowed on blessed servants of the Church.Miracles of great potency bestowed on blessed servants of the Church.
ANIMAL GROWTH
Prayer name: Mercy of St Vinicus
Duration: 12 Turns
Range: 120′
A single animal is briefly haloed with glimmering Liturgic
script (the text of this prayer), turns its eyes toward the
heavens, and doubles in size.
Damage: Double the damage of the animal’s melee attacks.
Load: Double the maximum weight the animal can carry.
Restrictions: This spell may be used on normal or giant
animals, but intelligent animals, magical animals, and
fantastic monsters are unaffected.
The miracle of St Vinicus, Thrice-Hanged: The young Vini-
cus served as a vicar’s assistant in an isolated region border-
ing on a vast swamp. His days were spent cloistered in the
church crypts copying Liturgic texts, with mice and shrews his
only companions. The animals took to scurrying from their
burrows and climbing upon the young priest’s desk, quietly
observing his painstaking illumination and calligraphy. When
a great storm caused the surrounding swamp and rivers to
swell, the church was inundated and the crypts flooded, ruin-
ing years of Vinicus’ work. Pitying the mice and shrews whose
companionship he held dear, Vinicus prayed for their salva-
tion. The animals were transformed into gigantic stature—as
large as ponies—and burrowed out of the crypts unharmed.
The great holes they made in the church walls as they escaped
were maintained as proof of this miracle. Patronages: Mice,
(churchwardens).
BLESS WEAPON
Prayer name: Courage of St Sedge
Duration: 1 Turn
Range: 30′
Silver light arcs from the caster’s hand and wreathes a
single weapon, enchanting it with holy power.
Damage: The weapon deals an additional 1d6 damage.
Treated as magical: The weapon now harms monsters
which can only be harmed by magic.
The miracle of St Sedge the Unblemished: In his youth, Sedge
served as a knight’s page and became embroiled in a bloody
war against the armies of a sorcerer king. His master was slain
by a spectral warrior, whom Sedge then confronted alone on
the field of battle. Praying to the One True God, he defeated the
monster with only his dirk, which was enveloped in a silvery
radiance. The site of the monster’s destruction scarred the
land with a circle of ash, upon which an obelisk recounting
the life of St Sedge was erected in later years. Patronages: Holy
warriors, (knifemakers).
CURE AFFLICTION
Prayer name: St Pastery’s Blessing
Duration: Instant
Range: 30′
The lowing of cattle can be heard as the caster recites this
prayer. A living subject receives one of the following minis-
trations:
1. Cure disease: The subject is purged of a single disease
of mundane or magical origin.
2. Cure blindness or deafness: The subject’s sight or
hearing are restored, nullifying any disease, curse, or
enchantment that veiled them.
The miracle of St Pastery, Butter-Monger: In his later years,
Pastery left his position as vicar in the village of his birth and
took up the life of a mendicant. Refused entry to the castle
of the ailing Prince Wallobringe during a plague epidemic,
St Pastery blessed the hands of all butchers and cow-herds
within a ten mile radius. The saint thus ensured that all meat
brought to the prince in his sickbed carried the blessing of the
host of heaven, restoring him to health, despite his refusal to
admit Pastery. (Wallobringe is a beloved figure of fable, known
as Good-Prince-Wallobringe, and famed for his generosity,
compassion, and love of mince pies.) Patronages: Butchers,
(well-borers).

=== PAGE 109 ===
P a r t F i v e | m a g i c
107
HOLY LIGHT
Prayer name: Devotion of St Eggort
Duration: Permanent or 6 Turns
Range: 120′
A ray of white light beams from the caster’s raised hand
and manifests one of the following effects:
1. Eternal radiance: Casts holy light in a 30′ radius. The
light is as bright as full daylight (creatures that suffer
penalties in daylight are affected). The prayer may only
be cast upon a fixed location within range—the eternal
radiance does not move. The duration is permanent.
2. Beacon of sanctity: White light radiates in a 15′ radius
around a chosen object. Undead creatures suffer a –2
penalty to Attack Rolls and Saving Throws while within
the radius of light. The duration is 6 Turns.
3. Cancelling magical darkness: Devotion of St Eggort
may cancel a 30′ radius area of magical darkness.
The miracle of St Eggort the Troglodyte: Taking on unusually
severe oaths of solitude and silence, Eggort devoted his life to
prayer in the crypt of the monastery where he dwelt. Spending
his days alone in the darkness, Eggort’s devotion manifested,
over many years as a flickering glow upon the altar. This light
grew and grew until, at the time of Eggort’s death, the crypt
was lit as bright as day, as if by the light of a thousand votive
candles. The crypt exists to this day as a site of pilgrimage.
Patronages: Chandlers, (undertakers).
LOCATE OBJECT
Prayer name: St Keye’s Revelation
Duration: 6 Turns
Range: 120′
A cherub-like apparition of the infant St Keye points in
the direction of a sought object, adjusting the indicated
direction as the caster moves. One of two types of objects
may be located:
1. General class: An object of a general class (e.g. a stair-
way, an altar, etc.). In this case, the nearest object of that
type is located.
2. Specific object: A specific object which the caster can
clearly visualise in all aspects.
Restrictions: This spell cannot be used to locate creatures.
The miracle of St Keye the Chronicler: The son of a noble,
Keye was born into a life of luxury, with a retinue of servants
tending to his family’s every need. Even as an infant, Keye was
fascinated with the manor’s vast libraries of tomes, scrolls,
and chronicles, pulling books off of the shelves and gazing at
their pages with wonder. On the eve of Keye’s second birthday,
scornful knights in the service of a neighbouring duke arrived
at the manor. Presenting befuddling legal documents, the
knights announced their liege’s claim to the lands of Keye’s
family and his plan to instate his youngest son as lord of their
manor. Unable to present any counter-evidence and fearing
the cruel duke’s military might, the family solemnly prepared
to accept their fate. Upon the arrival of the duke’s smirking
son to take up his promised lordship, the infant Keye, unable
to read or write, miraculously produced a lost charter prov-
ing his family’s right to their lands. Patronages: Historians,
(infants), (lost objects).
REMOVE CURSE
Prayer name: St Primula’s Grace
Duration: Instant
Range: The caster or a creature touched
Milk drips from the caster’s hand as they recite this prayer.
The subject, doused in holy milk, is permanently cured of
the affliction of a single curse.
Cursed items: Use of this spell enables a character to
discard a cursed magic item.
The miracle of St Primula the Beneficent: Born to a servant
family, Primula spent her youth as a milkmaid. As the sun set
one autumn eve, she encountered a wretched, scrawny man,
hobbling along on a stick and dragging a sack behind him.
Pitying him, she invited him into a barn and offered him a
bowl of curds and whey. The man revealed his story, claiming
to be a knight named Sir Gamulet, stricken by a fairy curse
of weakness and reduced to dragging his armour in a sack.
Primula bade the accursed knight to lay his head on the straw
and began to wash the grime from his face. A group of oxen
gathered around and, mimicking the maid’s deed, proceeded
to gently lick the knight until he fell soundly asleep. Upon
awakening the next morning, Sir Gamulet’s strength had
miraculously returned, the wicked fairy curse washed away
by the ministrations of Primula and her oxen. Patronages:
Oxen, (the strong of arms).

=== PAGE 110 ===
108
P a r t F i v e | m a g i c
Rank 4 Holy Spells
Powerful miracles bestowed on exalted servants of the Church.Powerful miracles bestowed on exalted servants of the Church.
CIRCLE OF PROTECTION
Prayer name: St Faxis’ Abjuration
Duration: 12 Turns
Range: 10′ around the caster
A sword of glowing light manifests and inscribes a 10′
radius circle around the caster, leaving a shimmering ring
of light which moves with the caster. The caster and all
allies within the circle come under the effect of a Mantle of
Protection, warded against attacks by Chaotic creatures as
well as creatures created or summoned by magic.
AC and Saving Throw bonus: Those warded gain a +1
Armour Class and Saving Throw bonus against attacks
and special powers of affected creatures.
Magically created or summoned creatures: The prayer
additionally prevents such creatures from making melee
attacks against those warded, though they may still make
ranged attacks. If any of the warded party engages such a
creature in melee, this protection is broken (those warded
still gain the Armour Class and Saving Throw bonuses
mentioned above).
The miracle of St Faxis the Penitent: Surrounded by mali-
cious sorcerers in the depths of Dolmenwood, Faxis—a young
soldier, at the time—valiantly drew his sword and challenged
them in the name of God to come within reach of the blade.
Cackling, the wizards advanced. However, by the will of God,
they were unable to come close enough to accost the young
Faxis and their evil magic was repulsed. Patronages: Seekers,
hunters of evil sorcerers, (soldiers).
CREATE WATER
Prayer name: St Quister’s Defence
Duration: Permanent
Range: Touch
A magical fount of wine-red water springs forth from the
ground or a wall. The liquid looks and tastes like a sweet,
refreshing wine, but it is actually pure water.
Volume: The fount produces enough to sustain 12 people
and 12 mounts for one day (approximately 50 gallons).
Higher Level casters: If the caster is higher than Level 9,
water sufficient for an additional 12 people and mounts is
produced for each Level beyond 9.
The miracle of St Quister, Ever-Loyal: Attending a royal feast
as an emissary of the Church, Quister received a divine vision
warning him that the wine being served was poisoned. Leaping
onto the table before the king, the priest prayed to the One
True God, desperately pleading for the wine to be purified.
Miraculously, all the host’s wine was instantly transmuted
into pure water. Misunderstanding the priest’s ravings as an
affront to the king, the royal guard dragged him from the table
and executed him on the spot. Only later was it discovered that
the wine was poisoned and that Quister was acting to save the
king. Patronages: Vintners, beefeaters, (hounds).
GREATER HEALING
Prayer name: Steadfastness of St Wick
Duration: Instant
Range: The caster or a creature touched
The rustic voice of St Wick manifests, whispering a parable
as the caster touches a living subject.
Healing: The prayer restores 2d6+2 Hit Points to the
subject. This cannot raise the subject’s Hit Points above
the normal maximum.
The miracle of St Wick the Venerable: A man of humble
origins, Wick worked as a bargeman, ferrying passengers
across a great lake and entertaining them with religious
parables along the way. When a belligerent knight became
angered and impaled Wick upon his lance, the saint-to-be
calmly removed himself from the weapon’s shaft and contin-
ued preaching, the wound miraculously healed. Patronages:
Ferry-folk, (grandfathers).

=== PAGE 111 ===
P a r t F i v e | m a g i c
109
REMOVE POISON
Prayer name: St Torphia’s Respite
Duration: Instant
Range: The caster or a creature or object touched
The rattling of manacles echoes as a warm light envel-
ops the caster’s hand. The light neutralises poison in one
touched creature or object.
Living creature: Neutralise the effects of poison on a living
subject. A subject that has died from poisoning can be
revived (restored to 1 Hit Point) if Remove Poison is cast
within 10 Rounds.
Object or substance: Remove poison from an item, food,
or liquid.
The miracle of St Torphia of the Solitudes: Torphia lived in
a land where the faithful of the Pluritine Church were perse-
cuted. She was captured and thrown into a dungeon. Her cruel
captors took to feeding her nothing but poisonous berries.
Before her eventual execution and martyrdom, Torphia
survived for seven months on naught save the poison fruit
and the will of God. Patronages: The unjustly imprisoned,
(foragers), (prison guards).
SPEAK WITH PLANTS
Prayer name: Salvation of St Wort
Duration: 3 Turns
Range: The caster
A vision of a great yew tree briefly manifests behind the
caster, its limbs arching protectively overhead. The caster
gains the miraculous ability to communicate with plants.
Normal plants: Flora informs the caster of creatures that
have recently passed or performs simple favours. For
example, plants may clear a passageway for the caster’s
party to pass through or writhe and tangle into an impass-
able thicket to hinder pursuers.
Monstrous plants: The caster can communicate with
plant-like or plant-based monsters.
The miracle of St Wort the Benignant: As a wandering
pilgrim, St Wort was accosted by bandits. They robbed the
saint, stripped him naked, tied him to a lone yew tree atop a
barren hill, and left him to die. St Wort implored the One True
God to come to his aid. In response, the yew tree upon which
he hung took pity on the saint and twisted its branches to
snap his bonds. The saint thanked the tree and blessed all of
its kind, which to this day are regarded as holy. Patronages:
Yew trees, (coppicers).
SERPENT TRANSFORMATION
Prayer name: St Horace’s Requital
Duration: 6 Turns
Range: 120′
Accompanied by the merry laughter of St Horace and the
waft of freshly unearthed mushrooms, 2d8 normal sticks
leap to attention and miraculously transform into adders.
Commands: The snakes follow the caster’s orders for the
duration of the spell.
Reversion: When the spell ends or a snake is killed, the
serpent reverts back to a normal stick.
Adder
Small animal—animal intelligence—neutral
Level 1 AC 13 HP 1d8 (4) Saves D12 R13 H14 B15 S16
Att Bite (+0, 1d3 + poison) Speed 30 Morale 7 XP 15
Poison: Save Versus Doom or suffer 1 damage per Round
for the next 1d6 Rounds.
When killed: The snake reverts back to a normal stick.
The miracle of St Horace the Puissant: As a young friar,
Horace (known colloquially as “Brother Windbag”) wandered
the paths of Dolmenwood, bringing the light of the One True
God—in addition to the delights of his sackful of mush-
rooms—to isolated hamlets. One evening, as Horace recited his
bedtime prayers, a pook morel (a type of sentient mushroom
with a penchant for theft) jumped out from behind a mossy log.
Using its powers of illusion, the pook transformed the friar’s
rosary into a wriggling centipede. Recoiling in horror, Horace
dropped the insect into the grasp of the giggling pook. As the
mushroom fled into a thicket, Horace prayed for retribution.
The rosary transformed once more: this time into a hissing
adder, which grabbed the pook in its fangs and brought it to the
friar’s feet. After a night of penance within Horace’s mushroom
sack, the pook morel was released, under the condition that it
would spread the word of the Pluritine Church among its kind.
It is said that, since that day, pook morels, though unable to
change their nature, refuse to steal from friars. Patronages:
Mendicants, adders, (mushrooms).

=== PAGE 112 ===
110
P a r t F i v e | m a g i c
Rank 5 Holy Spells
Great miracles bestowed upon the mightiest servants of the Church.Great miracles bestowed upon the mightiest servants of the Church.
COMMUNION
Prayer name: St Elsa’s Visitation
Duration: 3 Turns
Range: The caster
This prayer allows the caster to enter into communion with
one of the ascended saints, asking questions and receiving
answers relaying the divine wisdom of the One True God.
The spell must be cast upon the saint’s feast day (see the
free Dolmenwood Calendar PDF at dolmenwood.com).
Trance: For the duration of the spell, the caster is in a
spiritual trance, unaware of the world around them.
Questions: The caster may ask 3 questions of the saint.
Answers: Each question receives a simple “yes” or “no”
answer. The answers are guaranteed to be true.
Usage limit: Communion may be cast once per week. The
Referee can limit it to once per month if overused.
St Clewyd: For theologically unclear reasons, St Clewyd
does not respond to this spell.
The miracle of St Elsa, Balm-Gusher: As the vicar of a coastal
village, Elsa received a vision of a great flood on the eve of
the feast of St Whittery. Heeding this prophecy, she insisted
that a high tower be built, with enough space to house the
inhabitants of the village and their livestock. The project was
regarded by many as a folly, but the saint’s visions were vindi-
cated when a great sea dragon, hunted by the famed knight Sir
Willowthorn, was beached and slain, opening a sea bay which
engulfed the village. To this day, the saint’s tower is the sole
surviving element of the original settlement. Patronages:
Floods, towers, hunters of sea monsters, (follies).
CREATE FOOD
Prayer name: St Ponch’s Feast
Duration: Permanent
Range: Appears in the caster’s presence
Barrels and hampers of fresh food wash up on a foaming
swell of seawater. The brine disappears instantly, but the
food remains.
Volume: Food sufficient for 12 people and 12 mounts is
conjured—enough to last one day.
Higher Level casters: If the caster is higher than Level 9,
food sufficient for an additional 12 people and mounts is
produced for each Level beyond 9.
The miracle of St Ponch the Prudent: Ponch was a whaler in
a northern land. When a leviathan destroyed the vessel he
worked on, he was the sole survivor of the wreck and drifted
for weeks alone on a spur of wood. Offering his soul to the
One True God, the young seaman was miraculously provided
with fresh pears and scones. A month later, he washed up on
the shore at Dretcher’s Bay in fighting fit (and evangelistic)
condition. Patronages: Whalers, castaways, (scones), (pears).
HOLY FIRE
Prayer name: St Goodenough’s Rebuke
Duration: Concentration (up to 1 Turn) or instant
Range: 30′ or the caster or a creature touched
A column of holy fire surrounds the caster, channelling
divine grace for one of three purposes:
1. Circle of warding: By concentrating and remaining
stationary, the caster creates a ward against undead
and creatures created or summoned by magic. Any such
creature that comes within 30′ must Save Versus Spell
or be destroyed or banished to its place of origin. If a
monster’s save succeeds, it flees the warded area.
2. Target single monster: Instantly banish or destroy a
single magically-summoned, created, or undead crea-
ture within range. The monster may Save Versus Spell
(with a –2 penalty) to avoid banishment or destruction.
If the monster’s save succeeds, it flees the affected area.
3. Restoration: Touching a subject instantly removes a
curse, disease, or other affliction.
The miracle of St Goodenough the Hearty: In old age, Good-
enough left his cloistered life and took a vow of mendicant
poverty. Wandering the forest, he was tricked into the cottage
of an evil sorceress with promises of warm stew. Goodenough
escaped the clutches of her horde of straw-manikins by invok-
ing the fiery light of God. The sinister, creeping dolls were
destroyed by holy fire, and the saint fled with his life. Patron-
ages: Warding against evil, (corn-dolls), (picnics).

=== PAGE 113 ===
P a r t F i v e | m a g i c
111
HOLY QUEST
Prayer name: Righteousness of St Galaunt
Duration: Until quest is completed
Range: 30′
Accompanied by a clap of thunder and a ray of holy light,
the caster commands a single subject to perform a specific
quest or task.
Example quests: Rescuing a prisoner, killing a specific
monster, bringing a magic item to the caster, going on a
journey to a holy site.
Suicidal quests: The prescribed quest must not be obvi-
ously suicidal.
Refusal: The subject must undertake the quest or suffer a
–2 penalty to Attack Rolls and Saving Throws.
Completion: Once the task is completed, the spell ends.
Saving throw: The subject may Save Versus Spell to resist
the holy compulsion, negating the effects of the spell.
The miracle of St Galaunt the Wonderworker: As an old man,
St Galaunt dwelt as a hermit in the frost-marshes of the north,
visited by pilgrims seeking his counsel. One day, a vain man
named Hoggeld knocked upon the saint’s door, claiming to
also be blessed by God and boastfully wishing to demonstrate
his divine powers. In the presence of the true saint, Hoggeld’s
supposed powers failed him. Galaunt commanded the shamed
pilgrim journey south to retrieve the fabled chalice of St
Indominant, lost for generations. For seventeen years did
Hoggeld wander, seeking the fabled chalice. Finally uncov-
ering it in the hoard of a desert demon, he brought it to the
holy city of Loom, where it rests to this day. The return of the
chalice was attributed largely to the wisdom of St Galaunt.
Patronages: Pilgrimage, truth-seeing, (marsh-dwellers).
INSECT PLAGUE
Prayer name: Amity of St Cornice
Duration: 1 Turn per Level
Range: 360′
A writhing, 60′ diameter swarm of biting insects manifests
at a location within range.
Movement: The swarm does not move from the area it is
summoned in.
Inside the swarm: Vision is limited to 30′. Biting insects
inflict 1 damage per Round on all creatures.
Creatures of Level 1–2: Low-level creatures caught within
the swarm flee in horror and only stop when at least 240′
away.
The miracle of St Cornice of the Angels: As a maiden, Cornice
worked scrubbing the kitchens of a cruel lord. Due to her natu-
ral beauty, the lord wished to marry Cornice to his cowardly
son, but he had her cast into the dungeons after her repeated
refusals. The saint-to-be whispered to the beetles crawling
across the floor of her cell, beseeching them in the name of
the One True God to aid her. The insects obeyed, fetching ever
more of their kind, overrunning the castle. When the swarm
encroached upon the lord’s bedchambers, he relented and
had Cornice released. Patronages: Chastity, beetles, (scullery
maids).
RAISE DEAD
Prayer name: Mercy of St Clewyd
Duration: Instant
Range: 120′
The ultimate miracle—by the grace of God, a deceased
person may be returned to life.
Restrictions: Mortals may be raised. Fairies and demi-
fey may not, the fate of their souls being outside of the
purview of the Pluritine Church.
Ritual: Raise Dead requires a grandiose ritual in a cathe-
dral (e.g. in Castle Brackenwold), the participation of a
dozen priests, and the burning of rare incenses to the value
of 2,000gp. Despite its title, the ritual makes no reference
to St Clewyd.
Time limit: A person deceased for no longer than 2 days per
Level of the caster can be raised. (e.g. a Level 10 caster can
revive someone who has been dead up to 20 days.)
Weakness: Returning from death is an ordeal. Until the
subject gets 2 full weeks of bed rest, they have 1 Hit Point,
move at half Speed, cannot carry heavy items, and cannot
attack, cast spells, make Skill Checks, or use other Class
capabilities. Recovery from this weakness cannot be
hastened by magic of any kind.
The miracle of St Clewyd the Refulgent: As chief among the
saints revered in Dolmenwood, the life of St Clewyd is replete
with miracles. Primary among these is the absolvement of
the sins of Gondyw at his grave. Gondyw was a cruel judge
in a land to the north who persecuted the followers of the
Pluritine Church. Such was the passion of St Clewyd’s mercy,
that Gondyw was resurrected by the power of God, to serve
as Clewyd’s most trusted disciple and eventually to become
a saint himself. Patronages: Dolmenwood, repentance,
devil-slayers, (goldsmiths), (judges).

=== PAGE 114 ===
112
P a r t F i v e | m a g i c
Mossling Knacks
The curious semi-magical crafts practiced by mosslings.The curious semi-magical crafts practiced by mosslings.
M
osslings are something of a curiosity to those
sages who specialise in magic. On the surface,
they generally exhibit little aptitude for the
arcane. However, many of their kind practice inherited,
semi-magical crafts which they call knacks. It is not uncom-
mon to see a mossling speaking with the roots of trees or
whistling to unravel knotted threads. Such deeds can only
be classified as magical, even if mosslings themselves do
not apply the term.
Knacks known: Mosslings know knacks as granted by
their Kindred (see Mossling, p48). Each knack grants a
special magical talent at Levels 1, 3, 5, and 7.
MOSSLING KNACKS
d6 Knack d6 Knack
1 Bird friend 4 Thread whistling
2 Lock singer 5 Wood kenning
3 Root friend 6 Yeast master
BIRD FRIEND
Over the course of a life spent in the depths of the forest
among the colonies of birds, the mossling has learned to
speak their secret languages and has earned their trust.
Bird speech (Level 1): The mossling converses with birds
and understands their replies (which are typically simplis-
tic).
Bird companion (Level 3): The mossling can charm a bird
companion of Level 1 or less. If the bird fails a Save Versus
Spell, it remains in the company of the mossling until
dismissed. Only one bird may be charmed in this way at
a time.
Twittering message (Level 5): Once per day, forest birds
may relay a message of up to 10 words for the mossling. The
message is passed among the birds of the forest, carried
to the specified person or location at a rate of 12 miles per
hour. When it arrives at the destination, the message is
reproduced in the twitterings of the birds.
Summon flock (Level 7): Once per day, the mossling can
call upon the aid of woodland birds. A flock of sparrows,
starlings, thrushes, and blackbirds gathers and remains in
the mossling’s service for 1d4 Turns.
Flock of Birds
meDium animal—animal intelligence—neutral
Level 3 AC 13 HP 3d8 (13) Saves D11 R12 H13 B14 S15
Att Pecks and clawing (+2, 1d6) Fly 40 Morale 7 XP 40
LOCK SINGER
The mossling studies mysterious and closely-guarded
songs which have the power to charm locks.
Open simple locks (Level 1): For every Turn the mossling
sings to a simple, mundane lock, there is a 2-in-6 chance
the device is coaxed open.
Locate key (Level 3): A brief, whispered cant persuades a
lock to reveal the location of its key (or the closest key, if
multiple exist). The information is conveyed via a quiet
whining which only the mossling comprehends.
Snap shut (Level 5): Simple, mundane locks within 30′
instantly snap shut after a single Round of song.
Open any lock (Level 7): The mossling’s song can persuade
locks of any complexity to open, with a 2-in-6 chance of
success per Turn of singing. Even magically sealed locks are
cooperative, although in this case there is a 1-in-6 chance
of the magic backfiring and sealing the mossling’s mouth
shut for 1d4 days.
ROOT FRIEND
Dwelling in subterranean burrows, the mossling has devel-
oped a keen affinity with the roots of forest plants.
Root question (Level 1): Once per day, the mossling can
pose one question of a root about its surroundings. The
root answers truthfully with 1d6 words.
Summon roots (Level 3): The mossling can summon
edible roots to the surface once per day. 1d4 fresh rations
are produced.
Root respite (Level 5): The mossling may shelter in the roots
of a tree or other large plant once per day. The mossling is
taken underground into the plant’s root system, where
they may lie unnoticed for up to an hour.
Summon root thing (Level 7): The mossling can summon a
monstrous root vegetable from the earth once per day. The
creature arrives at the character’s location in 1d6 Rounds
and obeys their commands for 1d6 Turns before fleeing
into the undergrowth.
Root Thing
meDium Plant—animal intelligence—neutral
Level 3 AC 13 HP 3d8 (13) Saves D11 R12 H13 B14 S15
Att 2 claws (+2, 1d4 + entangle) Speed 30 Morale 9 XP 65
Entangle: If both claw attacks hit in the same Round, the
victim becomes entangled in the monster’s rooty grasp.
An entangled victim automatically suffers 1d4 damage per
Round and cannot attack. A Save Versus Hold is allowed,
once per Round, to escape.
Further details: See the DMB.

=== PAGE 115 ===
P a r t F i v e | m a g i c
113
THREAD WHISTLING
A mysterious whistling technique grants the mossling
sympathetic control over threads and strings within 30′.
Thread mastery (Level 1): The mossling’s whistling can
tie, untie, or unravel any textile thinner than rope: string,
laces, and the fabric of garments.
Animate threads (Level 3): The mossling commands loose
threads or strings to move as they direct. The threads may
be commanded to move up to 5′ per Round for as long as the
mossling whistles. Commanded threads do not have the
strength to attack, but do have the strength to drag small
objects (up to 20 coins of weight).
Rope mastery (Level 5): Ropes loosen or tighten at the
mossling’s command.
Animate rope (Level 7): At the mossling’s command, a rope
animates to attack and entangle foes. The mossling must
concentrate and continue to whistle while commanding
a rope—they may move at half Speed but may not attack
or perform other actions.
Animated Rope
Small conStruct—minDleSS—neutral
Level 1 AC 13 HP 1d8 (4) Saves D12 R13 H14 B15 S16
Att Grab (+0, entangle) Speed 30 Morale 12 XP 15
Entangle: On a successful attack, the rope wraps around
the victim. While entangled, the victim is unable to move.
The mossling may command the rope to constrict the
victim, inflicting 1d3 automatic damage per subsequent
Round.
Breaking free: Instead of attacking, an entangled victim
may Save Versus Hold to escape each Round.
WOOD KENNING
The mossling’s fingers are sensitised to the subtle vibra-
tions of tree and wood. By spending 1 Turn touching a
wooden item or the trunk of a tree, the mossling may glean
knowledge.
Sense history (Level 1): The mossling learns the name of
a wooden item’s creator or the name of the last person to
touch it.
Sense emotions (Level 3): The mossling discerns the most
recent strong emotion which the wood has absorbed from
a sentient being (wood is highly sensitive to such energies).
See beyond (Level 5): The mossling gains a momentary
image of what lies on the other side of a wooden barrier
(e.g. a door or wall).
True name (Level 7): The mossling learns a tree’s true
name. Once per day, the mossling may invoke one tree
whose true name they know, gaining a glimpse of the tree’s
surroundings. Invoking the true name of a deceased tree
provokes a curious vision of the vegetable afterlife.
YEAST MASTER
The mossling has a special affinity for the great mass of
yeasts and fungal spores that permeate the deep woods.
The yeast master hears the chorus of their song and counts
them as constant companions.
Ferment (Level 1): The mossling’s touch ferments sweet
liquids at a rate of one pint per Turn. The liquid is trans-
formed to a frothy, alcoholic brew, delicious to mosslings.
There is a 2-in-6 chance of it being palatable to other folk.
Commune with yeast (Level 3): The mossling communes
with the yeasts in alcoholic beverages. Sipping from a drink
which has been partly consumed by someone else reveals
the person’s name to the mossling.
Yeasty belch (Level 5): By allowing potent yeasts to ferment
in their belly, the mossling can emit a heady belch once per
day. The belch may be targeted at an individual within 10′,
who must Save Versus Blast or faint for 1d6 Rounds.
Yeast feast (Level 7): Summoning omnipresent micro-or-
ganisms, the mossling is able to conjure a yeasty feast
equivalent to 1d6 fresh rations. The food is composed of
chunks of fleshy, compacted yeast, frothing sheets of slime,
and bubbles of alcoholic brew. Such a feast may only be
produced once per day.

=== PAGE 116 ===


=== PAGE 117 ===
Part Six
Equipment, Services,
and Animals
N
ever mind the tricksome fairies, the perilous plants,
or the blasted standing stones. The real danger out
there in the wild is unpreparedness. And I don’t mean
just keeping your sword sharp. Without a sturdy backpack,
your gear gets wet and that torch won’t light when you find
yourself in some dank, god-forsaken place. That ball of twine
you forgot? Well, that could’ve been a tripwire around the camp
perimeter that let you know a hungry bear invited himself
to dinner. Oh, and a sprig of wolfsbane can be the difference
between life or death when you look up and notice that full
moon on a foggy autumn night.”
—Emelda Burl, human hunter
“

=== PAGE 118 ===
116
P a r t S i x | e q u i P m e n t , S e r v i c e S , a n D a n i m a l S
Adventuring Gear
The day-to-day tools of the trade of adventurers and vagabonds.The day-to-day tools of the trade of adventurers and vagabonds.
CONTAINERS
Item Capacity Cost (gp) Weight
Backpack 400 coins 4 50
Barrel 320 pints 1 70
Belt pouch 50 coins 1 10
Bucket 40 pints 1 20
Casket (iron, large) 800 coins 30 400
Casket (iron, small) 250 coins 10 100
Chest (wooden, large) 1,000 coins 5 200
Chest (wooden, small) 300 coins 1 50
Sack 600 coins 1 5
Scroll case 1 scroll 1 5
Vial (glass) 1/2 pint 1 1
Waterskin 2 pints 1 50 (full)
LIGHT
Item Cost (gp) Weight
Candles (10) 1 20 (2 each)
Lantern (hooded) 5 20
Lantern (bullseye) 10 20
Oil (flask) 1 10
Tinder box 3 10
Torches (3) 1 30 (10 each)
CAMPING AND TRAVEL
Item Cost (gp) Weight
Bedroll 2 70
Cooking pots 3 100
Firewood (bundle, 8 hours) 1 200
Fishing rod and tackle 4 50
Rations (preserved, 1 day) 2 20
Rations (fresh, 1 day) 1 20
Tent 20 20
HOLY ITEMS
Item Cost (gp) Weight
Holy symbol (gold) 100 20
Holy symbol (silver) 25 20
Holy symbol (wooden) 5 10
Holy water (vial) 25 10
MISCELLANEOUS TOOLS
Item Cost (gp) Weight
Bell (miniature) 1 1
Block and tackle 5 50
Caltrops (bag of 20) 1 20 (1 each)
Chain (10′ long) 30 100
Chalk (10 sticks) 1 10 (1 each)
Chisel 2 20
Crowbar 10 50
Grappling hook 20 40
Hammer (small) 2 30
Hammer (sledgehammer) 5 100
Ink (vial) 1 5
Iron spikes (12) 1 60 (5 each)
Lock 20 10
Magnifying glass 3 5
Manacles 15 60
Marbles (bag of 20) 1 20 (1 each)
Mining pick 3 100
Mirror (small) 5 50
Musical instrument (stringed) 20 50
Musical instrument (wind) 5 20
Paper or parchment (2 sheets) 1 –
Pole (10′ long, wooden) 1 70
Quill 1 1
Rope (50′ long) 1 100
Rope ladder (25′ long) 5 200
Saw 1 20
Shovel 2 50
Spell book (blank) 100 50
Thieves’ tools 25 10
Twine (100′ ball) 1 10
Whistle 1 1
CLOTHING
Item Cost (gp) Weight
Clothes, common 1 30
Clothes, extravagant 100 60
Clothes, fine 20 40
Habit, friar’s 2 30
Robes, ritual 10 30
Winter cloak 2 20
Coinage
Gold pieces (gp): Worth 10sp, 100cp.
Silver pieces (sp): Worth 1/10gp, 10cp.
Copper pieces (cp): Worth 1/100gp, 1/10sp.
Pellucidium pieces (pp): Worth 5gp, 50sp, 500cp. Pellu-
cidium—commonly called fairy silver—is a pale, silvery
metal originating in Fairy. Even in pitch darkness, it
faintly glints as if under moonlight.
Common and Uncommon Items
Items listed in italics are only available in towns and
cities. Other items are available in all settlements.

=== PAGE 119 ===
P a r t S i x | e q u i P m e n t , S e r v i c e S , a n D a n i m a l S
117
ADVENTURING GEAR
Backpack: A leather bag with shoulder straps. Holds up
to 400 coins.
Barrel: A wooden barrel that holds 40 gallons (320 pints).
Bedroll: A heavy woollen blanket with a small pillow.
Bell: A 1″ brass bell.
Belt pouch: A leather pouch that holds up to 50 coins.
Block and tackle: Used for lifting heavy objects. Reduces
effective weight by 75%, but requires 4 times as much rope.
Bucket: Holds 40 pints (5 gallons).
Caltrops: Small metal spikes sufficient to cover a 5′ × 5′ area.
Creatures moving through the area have a 2-in-6 chance of
treading on a spike. Victims suffer a 50% Speed reduction
for 24 hours (or until they receive magical healing).
Candle: Casts dim light in a 5′ radius and burns for 1 hour.
Casket: A solid iron casket. A large casket can hold up to
800 coins; a small casket can hold up to 250 coins.
Chain: A 10′ length of heavy, iron chain.
Chalk: Useful for making markings on stone.
Chest: A large chest can hold 1,000 coins; a small chest can
hold 300 coins.
Chisel: Used with a hammer for chipping away stone.
Clothes: Full sets of clothing to cover the whole body,
including hose, tunic, shirt, belt, dress, etc.
Cooking pots: Pots and pans for campfire cooking.
Crowbar: An iron bar, 2–3′ long. Used for prying open
doors, chest lids, etc.
Firewood: A bundle of dry wood. Burns for 8 hours.
Fishing rod and tackle: A rod, line, hook, and bait box.
Grappling hook: Made of iron, with 3–4 hooks and a ring
to attach a rope.
Habit, friar’s: Simple hessian tunic and cowl with a cord
belt, worn by friars.
Hammer (small): Useful for hammering in iron spikes or
tapping stonework.
Hammer (sledgehammer): A big heavy hammer for break-
ing rock.
Holy symbol: Servants of the Pluritine Church must carry
a holy symbol worn around the neck. The quality of a holy
symbol alters its effectiveness at turning the undead. A
silver holy symbol grants a +1 bonus to the 2d6 roll which
determines the success of the turning attempt. A gold holy
symbol also grants a +1 bonus to the 2d4 roll which deter-
mines the number of monsters affected.
Holy water: Water blessed by high-ranking clergy, stored in
a special vial for use in religious rituals. Holy water inflicts
damage on undead monsters (see Weapons, p118). Loses
its power if transferred from the blessed vials it is stored in.
Ink: A vial of black ink. Coloured ink costs double. Suffi-
cient for about 50 pages of writing.
Iron spikes: May be used to wedge doors open or shut,
anchor ropes, and many other purposes.
Lantern: Shutters allow the light to be hidden and the
flame protected. Burns one oil flask every 4 hours (24
Turns). A hooded lantern casts light in a 30′ radius. A bull-
seye lantern casts light in a narrow beam, 60′ long and 20′
wide at the end.
Lock: A basic iron lock with a key.
Magnifying glass: Used for studying fine details.
Manacles: Iron manacles with a chain. Used for restraining
a creature’s hands or feet.
Marbles: A bag of small, colourful glass beads.
Mining pick: A strong pick for breaking rock.
Mirror (small): Useful for looking around corners or for
reflecting a monster’s harmful gaze.
Musical instrument: A stringed instrument (e.g. a lute or
mandolin) or a wind instrument (e.g. a flute or pipe). The
listed price is for an instrument of basic quality. Higher
quality instruments can cost up to 10 times as much.
Oil flask: A flask of oil fuels a lantern for four hours (24
Turns). Burning oil can also be used as a weapon, either by
throwing it at enemies (see Weapons, p118) or by pooling
it on the ground (covers a 3′ diameter area, burns for 1 Turn,
1d8 Damage to creatures passing through).
Paper or parchment: Approximately 1′-square sheets.
Pole (10′ long, wooden): A 2″ thick wooden pole useful for
poking and prodding suspicious items in a dungeon.
Quill: A large feather sharpened into a writing point.
Rations: Preserved rations last up to 2 months, or 1 week
in dank conditions (e.g. fungal forest, dungeons). Fresh
rations last for 1 week, or 1 day in dank conditions.
Robes, ritual: Fine quality robes with embroidered
symbols. Often used by magicians.
Rope: Strong enough to hold the weight of three people
and their equipment.
Rope ladder: Two ropes with looped rungs and a knot at
the top to attach a grappling hook. Strong enough to hold
the weight of three people and their equipment.
Sack: A large, hessian sack that can hold 600 coins.
Saw: A carpenter’s hand saw for cutting wood.
Scroll case: An oiled leather tube with a cap. Not completely
watertight.
Shovel: For excavating earth.
Spell book (blank): A hefty tome of vellum pages bound
in leather, suitable for inscribing spells. A spell book can
contain up to three spells.
Tent: Large enough for two people.
Thieves’ tools: A set of lock picking tools in a small case.
Tinder box: Used to light fires, including torches. In peril-
ous situations, there is a 2-in-6 chance of success lighting
a fire per Round.
Torch: When lit, casts light in a 30′ radius and burns for 1
hour (6 Turns). Torches may also be used in combat (see
Weapons, p118).
Twine: A wound ball of thin cord or string. Can support up
to 300 coins of weight.
Vial: A glass vial that can hold up to half a pint of liquid.
Waterskin: A leather container that holds up to 2 pints of
liquid. Weighs 5 coins when empty.
Winter cloak: A thick, woollen traveller’s cloak.
Whistle: Useful for signalling or faking bird calls.

=== PAGE 120 ===
118
P a r t S i x | e q u i P m e n t , S e r v i c e S , a n D a n i m a l S
Armour and Weapons
Arms to defend oneself against weird beasts that lie in wait.Arms to defend oneself against weird beasts that lie in wait.
WEAPONS
Weapon Cost (gp) Damage Weight Size Qualities
Battle axe 7 1d8 100 Medium Melee
Club 3 1d4 20 Medium Melee
Crossbow 30 1d8 50 Medium Armour piercing, Missile (80′ / 160′ / 240′), Reload, Two-handed
Dagger 3 1d4 10 Small Melee, Missile (10′ / 20′ / 30′)
Hand axe 4 1d6 20 Small Melee, Missile (10′ / 20′ / 30′)
Holy water vial 25 1d8 10 Small (See p116) Missile (10′ / 30′ / 50′), Splash
Lance 5 1d6 100 Large Brace, Charge, Melee, Reach
Longbow 40 1d6 40 Large Missile (70′ / 140′ / 210′), Two-handed
Longsword 10 1d8 30 Medium Melee
Mace 5 1d6 40 Medium Melee
Oil flask (burning) 1 1d8 10 Small (See p116) Missile (10′ / 30′ / 50′), Splash
Polearm 7 1d10 140 Large Brace, Melee, Reach, Two-handed
Shortbow 25 1d6 20 Medium Missile (50′ / 100′ / 150′), Two-handed
Shortsword 7 1d6 20 Medium Melee
Sling 2 1d4 10 Small Missile (40′ / 80′ / 160′)
Spear 3 1d6 30 Medium Brace, Melee, Missile (20′ / 40′ / 60′)
Staff 2 1d4 40 Medium Melee, Two-handed
Torch (flaming) 1 for 3 1d4 10 Medium (See p116) Melee
Two-handed sword 15 1d10 140 Large Melee, Two-handed
War hammer 5 1d6 40 Medium Melee
Size: Denotes which characters can use this type of weapon.
ARMOUR
Armour Cost (gp) AC Weight Bulk
Unarmoured – 10 – None
Leather 20 12 200 Light
Bark 30 13 300 Light
Chainmail 40 14 400 Medium
Pinecone 50 15 400 Medium
Plate mail 60 16 500 Heavy
Full plate 1,000 17 700 Heavy
Shield 10 +1 100 None
Italics: Usually only made and worn by mosslings.
Bulk: Denotes which characters can use this type of armour.
AMMUNITION
Ammunition Cost (gp) Weight
Arrows (quiver of 20) 5 20
Quarrels (case of 20) 10 20
Sling stones Free 1 each
Singles: A single arrow costs 25cp and a single quarrel costs 5sp.
Retrieving ammunition: When trying to gather fired
ammunition after a battle, characters can retrieve 50% of fired
rounds. Others are smashed or shattered—unusable.
WEAPON QUALITIES
Armour piercing: +2 Attack against targets wearing
non-magical metal armour.
Brace: When attacking a target that charged into melee
with the wielder this Round, inflicts double damage due
to bracing the weapon against the ground.
Charge: Charge attacks from a suitable mount (see Horses
and Vehicles, p120), double any damage inflicted.
Melee: Close quarters weapon, only usable within 5′ of an
opponent.
Missile: Thrown or fired weapon, only usable at greater
than 5′ from an opponent. The distances for short (+1
Attack), medium, and long (–1 Attack) range are shown in
parentheses.
Reach: Can be used to attack from the second rank, from
behind one or more allies in front. Incurs a –2 Attack
penalty if the ally in front is of equal size or larger than
the wielder or is using a two-handed weapon.
Reload: Can only be fired once every 2 Rounds, requiring
a Round to reload between shots.
Splash: On a successful attack, the container smashes and
douses the target with the liquid. The listed damage is
inflicted for 2 Rounds, as the liquid drips off.
Two-handed: Requires both hands to wield. The character
cannot carry anything (e.g. a shield) in the other hand.

=== PAGE 121 ===
P a r t S i x | e q u i P m e n t , S e r v i c e S , a n D a n i m a l S
119
WEAPONS
Battle axe: A heavy axe with a 3′ haft.
Club: A 2–3′ length of stout wood with a heavy head.
Crossbow: A bow mounted horizontally on a wooden shaft,
with a winding mechanism to pull back the string and
nock a quarrel. May be kept in the loaded position.
Dagger: A 1′ long, two-edged blade.
Hand axe: A 2′ long hatchet suitable for use in melee or
for throwing.
Lance: A 10′ shaft of strong wood tipped with a pointed,
leaf-shaped blade. Designed for use on horseback, but may
also be used on foot.
Longbow: A bow of around the wielder’s height, typically
6′ in length. Fires arrows.
Longsword: Typically double-edged and around 3–4′ in
length.
Mace: A 2–3′ haft with a studded, flanged, or spiked head.
Polearm: A long haft (8′ or longer) tipped with a stabbing
point or slashing blade. Many types of polearms exist, but
all are treated as one weapon type for simplicity.
Shortbow: A bow of around 4′ in length. Fires arrows.
Shortsword: 2′ blades designed as thrusting and stabbing
weapons.
Sling: A strap of leather or fabric used to twirl and launch
normal stones at high speed.
Spear: A haft of strong, flexible wood, typically around 5′
long, tipped with a stabbing metal point.
Staff: A stout length of wood, typically 6–8′ long. Staves
often double as walking sticks, but those designed for
combat may be shod with metal end caps.
Two-handed sword: A great, heavy sword, 5–6′ in length.
War hammer: A 2–3′ haft tipped with a heavy metal
hammer head, often with a spike on one side.
ARMOUR
Bark armour: Thick layers of tough, lichen-encrusted bark,
with flexible joints of young birch bark or bottle corks laced
together. Typically only available in small size, designed
for mosslings.
Chainmail: A suit of interlocking metal rings over a back-
ing of quilted fabric.
Full plate armour: Perfectly interlocking plates of metal
over a backing of chain mail and padding. Only the most
expert armourers can craft full plate armour, and each
suit must be tailored and balanced for a specific individ-
ual (takes 1 month). Wearing another person’s full plate
armour is awkward and only grants AC 16.
Leather armour: A breastplate of hardened leather, with
soft leather covering the rest of the body.
Pinecone armour: An intricate scale-work of hardened
pine scales threaded onto a cloth backing. Typically only
available in small size, designed for mosslings.
Plate mail: Metal plates shaped to the contours of the body.
Sections of chainmail provide flexibility at the joints.
Shield: Made of metal or reinforced wood.
Unarmoured: Standard clothing.
Tailoring Armour
Custom crafting: If armour suited to a character’s size
is not available for purchase, an armourer may be able
to craft custom-fitted armour. This has no extra cost,
but it takes 2d6 days.
Adapting armour: An armourer can adapt an exist-
ing suit of armour to a character of different size. This
process takes 2d6 days and costs half the armour’s full
price. For example, tailoring a suit of human-sized
chainmail to fit a woodgrue would cost 20gp.
Weapons of Special Metals
Adventurers in Dolmenwood sometimes seek out
weapons forged of cold iron or silver, as those metals
are harmful to fairies or certain undead monsters.
Time: Cold iron and silver weapons must be crafted to
special order, incurring a delay of 2d6 days.
Cold Iron Weapons
Cost: Double the weapon’s normal price.
Damage: Cold iron weapons gain a +1 damage bonus
against fairies and demi-fey, but suffer a –1 damage
penalty against other creatures. For example, a cold
iron shortsword inflicts 1d6+1 damage on a fairy or
demi-fey (rather than the standard 1d6) and 1d6–1
damage against other creatures.
Construction: Cold iron weapons are made of pure iron,
forged in flames of ancient yew wood, and doused in
water infused with mandrake root.
Silver Weapons
Cost: Ten times the weapon’s normal price.
Damage: Silver weapons inflict normal damage on all
foes, but certain foes can only be harmed by silver (or
magic) weapons.
Using Disallowed Weapons and Armour
(Optional Rule)
Characters may sometimes wish to use weapons or
armour not allowed by their Kindred or Class. This may
be handled as follows.
Weapons: –4 penalty to Attack Rolls.
Armour and shields: –2 Armour Class penalty. The
character cannot use Kindred or Class capabilities
reliant on stealth, reactions, or agility or of a magical
nature (e.g. glamours, spell casting).

=== PAGE 122 ===
120
P a r t S i x | e q u i P m e n t , S e r v i c e S , a n D a n i m a l S
Horses and Vehicles
Convenient for road travel, but may become burdensome in the tangled woods.Convenient for road travel, but may become burdensome in the tangled woods.
HORSES
Horse Cost (gp) Load Type
Charger 250 4,000 War
Dapple-doff 40 5,000 Draft
Hop-clopper 80 5,000 Draft
Mule 30 2,500 Mule
Prigwort prancer 75 3,000 Riding
Yellow-flank 250 3,500 Riding
Load: The maximum weight (in coins) the horse can carry at
normal Speed. Horses can carry double this load at half Speed.
Rider weight: Treat Small riders as 1,200 coins and Medium
riders as 1,700 coins, without equipment weight.
ACCESSORIES
Item Cost Weight
Feed (1 day) 5cp 100
Horse barding (+2 AC) 150gp 600
Pack saddle and bridle 10gp 150
Riding saddle and bridle 25gp 300
Riding saddle bags 5gp 100
HORSES
1. Charger
War horses bred for strength and courage in battle. Adapted
to short bursts of speed; not suited to long-distance riding.
large animal—animal intelligence—neutral
Level 3 AC 12 HP 3d8 (13) Saves D11 R12 H13 B14 S15
Att 2 hooves (+2, 1d6) Speed 40 Morale 9 XP 65
Charge: Trained to charge into melee, requiring a clear
run of 40′. When charging, the horse cannot attack, but a
successful lance attack by the rider inflicts double damage.
Melee: When in melee, both rider and horse can attack.
2. Dapple-Doff
Mighty, shaggy-furred draft horses, bred for their great
strength. Dull-witted and easily spooked.
large animal—animal intelligence—neutral
Level 3 AC 12 HP 3d8 (13) Saves D11 R12 H13 B14 S15
Att None Speed 30 Morale 5 XP 40
3. Hop-Clopper
Stocky, green-maned draft horses beloved by Prigwort
breweries. Get tetchy without their daily pint of ale.
large animal—animal intelligence—neutral
Level 3 AC 12 HP 3d8 (13) Saves D11 R12 H13 B14 S15
Att 2 hooves (+2, 1d4) Speed 30 Morale 7 XP 40
4. Mule
Stubborn horse/donkey cross-breeds used as beasts of
burden. Unlike other horses, mules can be taken under-
ground.
large animal—animal intelligence—neutral
Level 2 AC 12 HP 2d8 (9) Saves D12 R13 H14 B15 S16
Att Kick (+1, 1d4) or bite (+1, 1d3) Speed 40 Morale 8
XP 20
5. Prigwort Prancer
Lightly built horses adapted to run at high speed. Fond of
snacking on acorns in the autumn.
large animal—animal intelligence—neutral
Level 2 AC 12 HP 2d8 (9) Saves D12 R13 H14 B15 S16
Att 2 hooves (+1, 1d4) Speed 80 Morale 7 XP 20
6. Yellow-Flank
Tall, slender horses favoured by nobility, with flowing,
silver manes and golden dappling along their sides. The
haughty, laughing neigh of the yellow-flank bespeaks the
breed’s rumoured fairy ancestry.
large animal—Semi-intelligent—any alignment
Level 3 AC 12 HP 3d8 (13) Saves D11 R12 H13 B14 S15
Att 2 hooves (+2, 1d4) Speed 60 Morale 7 XP 40
Alignment: The Referee should secretly determine the
Alignment of each yellow-flank, at random. After 1d3 weeks
of being owned by a character of differing Alignment, the
horse attempts to escape, even chewing reins and tethers.
ACCESSORIES
Feed: A sack of hay, oat grains, and the odd apple or carrot
to chomp.
Horse barding: Armour made of leather and plates of
metal. Grants a +2 bonus to Armour Class.
Saddle and bridle: A riding saddle is a leather seat required
to mount and ride a horse. A pack saddle is necessary for
horses to carry heavy loads, as it includes a rack upon
which to lash crates, bags, and bundles.
Riding saddle bags: Hold up to 500 coins of weight.
Riding Horses and Overland Travel
Riding horses have Speed higher than 40, but can only
move at this rate for short bursts (up to 1 hour). When
travelling overland for long distances, parties mounted
on riding horses are treated as having Speed 40 (see
Travel, p156).

=== PAGE 123 ===
P a r t S i x | e q u i P m e n t , S e r v i c e S , a n D a n i m a l S
121
LAND VEHICLES
Cart: A two-wheeled vehicle. If pulled by twice as many
animals (2 draft horses or 4 mules), a cart can hold up to
20,000 coins of weight.
Wagon: A four-wheeled, open vehicle. If pulled by twice as
many animals (4 draft horses or 8 mules), a wagon can hold
up to 40,000 coins of weight.
WATER VEHICLES
Barge: A flat-bottomed boat, 20′ long and 10′ wide, designed
for carrying cargo. Barges may be rowed, pushed with
poles, or pulled by horses on the riverbank.
Canoe: A small boat, 15′ long and 3′ wide, made of hide or
canvas stretched over a wooden frame. Because of its small
size and lightweight construction (weighing 500 coins), a
canoe may be carried by two people.
Fishing boat: A small sailing boat, 20–30′ long and 6′ wide.
Raft: A professionally built raft has raised sides, a basic
steering oar, and some form of shelter for goods or passen-
gers. Such a raft may be up to 30′ × 40′. Professionally built
rafts are sometimes floated downstream with cargo and
then broken down and sold for the value of their wood
(25cp per square foot).
Raft, makeshift: Given sufficient trees for wood, characters
may build a makeshift raft in 1d3 days per 10′ square section
(up to a maximum size of 20′ × 30′).
Rowing boat: A small wooden boat for 1–2 people, 10′ long
and 4′ wide.
Rules For Vehicles
Basic stats: Vehicles have Armour Class, Hit Points,
and Speed.
Damaging: Magic, area effects (e.g. flaming oil), and
giant monsters’ attacks inflict 1/5 normal damage.
Normal attacks (e.g. bows, claws, swords) are ineffective.
Effects of damage: A vehicle’s Speed is reduced by 10%
for every 10% of its maximum Hit Points it loses.
Repairs: Crew can repair damage up to half a vehicle’s
maximum Hit Points in the field. Full repairs require
a workshop or dock.
Cargo: Lists the maximum weight of cargo (in coins) a
vehicle can carry.
Crew / animals: Lists the number of beasts of burden,
trained sailors (see Specialist Services, p132), or
untrained characters needed to operate the vehicle.
Reduced crew: A vehicle’s Speed is reduced by 10% for
every 10% of its crew that is missing.
Passengers: Vehicles can carry passengers in place of
cargo: one Small or Medium person per 5,000 coins of
cargo space.
Water Travel
Drifting along Dolmenwood’s waterways is handled
using the normal travel rules (see Travel, p156). The
Referee tracks the party’s position along the body of
water as they travel.
Lakes: Treat as hexes with a cost of 2 Travel Points.
Rivers: Treat similarly to roads, costing 2 Travel Points
per 6 miles when travelling downstream (i.e. with the
current) and 3 Travel Points per 6 miles when travelling
upstream (i.e. against the current). On the Referee’s hex
map (DCB), rivers are annotated with 6 mile marker
points.
Hex features: The party may explore any features
along the shore in hexes they pass through.
Rest: The vessel is assumed to be docked or anchored
during rest breaks and at night.
LAND VEHICLES
Vehicle Cost (gp) AC HP Speed Cargo Animals
Cart 100 10 1d4 30 10,000 1 draft horse or 2 mules
Wagon 200 10 2d4 30 20,000 2 draft horses or 4 mules
WATER VEHICLES
Vehicle Cost (gp) AC HP Speed Cargo Crew
Barge 500 11 1d20 + 20 30 160,000 2–4 sailors
Canoe 30 10 1d4 60 5,000 1–2 untrained
Fishing boat 350 12 1d20 + 20 60 25,000 1–2 sailors
Raft 1gp per sq.ft. 10 5 per 10′ sq. 20 500 per sq.ft. 1 untrained
Raft, makeshift – 10 3 per 10′ sq. 20 250 per sq.ft. 1 untrained
Rowing boat 25 10 2d4 40 5,000 1–2 untrained

=== PAGE 124 ===
122
P a r t S i x | e q u i P m e n t , S e r v i c e S , a n D a n i m a l S
Hounds
Loyal companions for the traveller on lonely roads.Loyal companions for the traveller on lonely roads.
HOUNDS
Hound Cost (gp) Type
Bloodhound 25 Tracking
Dapper 60 Companion
Dolmen pincher 30 Hunting
Lankston mastiff 50 Guard dog
Lichhound 150 Undead ward
Pisker 75 Fairy ward
Seelie dog 60 Companion
Spookhound 120 Undead ward
ACCESSORIES
Item Cost (gp) Weight
Dog armour (+2 AC) 25 200
Feed (1 day) 1 20
HOUNDS
1. Bloodhound
Medium hounds with sleek, rusty fur and blood red eyes.
Bred for their excellent tracking skills. Common working
dogs found in every woodland village in Dolmenwood.
meDium animal—animal intelligence—neutral
Level 2 AC 13 HP 2d8 (9) Saves D12 R13 H14 B15 S16
Att Bite (+1, 1d6) Speed 50 Morale 7 XP 20
Tracking: Excellent scent-trackers. Once a bloodhound is
on the trail, it is exceedingly difficult to thwart.
2. Dapper
Curly-furred dogs with huge, floppy ears and great fringes
that obscure their eyes. Dappers are favoured by the noble
classes for their curious love of dressing in preposterous
outfits and performing amusing dances.
Small animal—animal intelligence—neutral
Level 2 AC 13 HP 2d8 (9) Saves D12 R13 H14 B15 S16
Att Bite (+1, 1d4) Speed 50 Morale 7 XP 20
Language: Dappers are able to mimic speech. Each dog can
be trained to mimic up to 10 words, though they have no
inkling of their meaning.
3. Dolmen Pincher
Sleek, muscular hunting hounds with black fur and a rusty
muzzle. Employed especially for hunting large beasts.
meDium animal—animal intelligence—neutral
Level 2 AC 12 HP 2d8 (9) Saves D12 R13 H14 B15 S16
Att Bite (+1, 1d6 + bring down prey) Speed 50 Morale 9
XP 35
Bring down prey: If a dolmen pincher successfully attacks
a target of Level 4 or less and rolls 4 or higher for damage, it
drags down the target. In the following Round, the target
may not move and suffers a –1 penalty to Armour Class
and Attack.
4. Lankston Mastiff
Huge, bulky beasts with thick, shaggy fur and a volatile,
vicious temperament. Mastiffs make excellent and diligent
guard dogs, but they are notoriously difficult to train.
meDium animal—animal intelligence—neutral
Level 3 AC 12 HP 3d8 (13) Saves D11 R12 H13 B14 S15
Att Bite (+2, 1d6+1) Speed 40 Morale 9 XP 40
Failed Morale Checks: If a Lankston mastiff fails a Morale
Check, there is a 2-in-6 chance that it will go wild, attack-
ing anyone who comes near to it (including its owner or
trainer). This state is permanent.

=== PAGE 125 ===
P a r t S i x | e q u i P m e n t , S e r v i c e S , a n D a n i m a l S
123
5. Lichhound
Stocky, grey, wiry-furred hounds with upright, pointed
ears and narrow, yellow eyes. Lichhounds are bred by the
Church as companions for graveyard wardens and clerics
of the order of Saint Signis.
Small animal—animal intelligence—neutral
Level 1 AC 12 HP 1d8 (4) Saves D12 R13 H14 B15 S16
Att Bite (+0, 1d4) or 1 turning bark Speed 40 Morale 8
XP 10
Fear no undead: Do not check Morale when in combat with
undead monsters.
Turning bark (once a day): A lichhound may emit a baying
that is terrifying to the undead. On a 2d6 roll of 7 or more,
Level 1 undead monsters are turned, and on a roll of 9 or
more, Level 2 monster are turned. If the baying succeeds,
2d4 undead monsters flee from the hound for 1 Turn.
6. Pisker
Stocky, short-legged dogs with lustrous reddish fur, loll-
ing tongues, and soft, pudgy bellies. Known for their
frisky, boisterous temperament and obnoxious yapping.
Commonly kept by the people of Prigwort, who fear the
presence of fairies.
Small animal—animal intelligence—neutral
Level 2 AC 11 HP 2d8 (9) Saves D12 R13 H14 B15 S16
Att Bite (+1, 1d6) Speed 40 Morale 8 XP 20
Detect fairies: All animals exhibit an uneasiness in the
presence of fairies. In piskers, however, this instinct is
honed to perfection. A pisker (even when sleeping) can
detect fairies within 20′ and will make their presence
known by incessantly yelping for 1 Turn.
7. Seelie Dog
Tall, silver-furred hounds with the delicate bone struc-
ture and long legs suited for running. Seelie dogs’ eyes are
bright pink, and they are said to be of fairy ancestry.
Small animal—Semi-intelligent—neutral
Level 1 AC 13 HP 1d8 (4) Saves D12 R13 H14 B15 S16
Att Bite (+0, 1d4) Speed 60 Morale 7 XP 10
Language: Cannot speak, but have a basic understanding
of language (typically Woldish and Sylvan).
Loyalty: Seelies are notoriously picky about their compan-
ions—there is only a 2-in-6 chance of a seelie dog taking
to a mortal owner. If the dog dislikes the owner, it will be
utterly obstinate. If it likes the owner, it will be unfailingly
loyal.
8. Spookhound
Slender, short-haired hounds of gentle demeanour, recog-
nisable for their white/grey coats, fluffy tails, and buggy
eyes. The spookhound was bred for the ability to detect
the presence of the undead.
Small animal—animal intelligence—neutral
Level 1 AC 12 HP 1d8 (4) Saves D12 R13 H14 B15 S16
Att Bite (+0, 1d4) Speed 40 Morale 6 XP 10
Smell undead: Spookhounds are able to smell undead
monsters (both corporeal and incorporeal) within 60′.
They are typically trained to bark in response to this scent.
ACCESSORIES
Dog armour: Light leather armour with a spiked collar.
Grants a +2 bonus to Armour Class.
Feed: Fresh meat scraps and bones to gnaw. Dogs may also
be fed on rations of freshly caught game (see Finding Food
in the Wild, p152).

=== PAGE 126 ===
124
P a r t S i x | e q u i P m e n t , S e r v i c e S , a n D a n i m a l S
Lodgings and Food
The comforts of a real bed and a hearty meal, oft dreamed of by adventurers!The comforts of a real bed and a hearty meal, oft dreamed of by adventurers!
POOR LODGINGS
Item Cost
Food: main dish 1sp
Food: side dish 5cp
Lodging: common room floor, 1 night 2cp
Lodging: shared room (8 beds), 1 night 1sp
Lodging: shared room (4 beds), 1 night 2sp
Stabling and fodder, 1 night 2sp
COMMON LODGINGS
Item Cost
Bath in private room 5sp
Food: main dish 3sp
Food: side dish 2sp
Lodging: common room floor, 1 night 5cp
Lodging: shared room (2 beds), 1 night 4sp
Lodging: private room, 1 night 8sp
Stabling and fodder, 1 night 4sp
FANCY LODGINGS
Item Cost
Bath in private room 4sp
Food: main dish 2gp
Food: side dish 15sp
Food: dessert 2gp
Lodging: private room, 1 night 1gp
Lodging: double room, 1 night 2gp
Lodging: private suite, 1 night 5gp
Personal services (coiffure, laundry, etc.) 1gp
Private dining room 1gp/person
Stabling and fodder, 1 night 6sp
ESTABLISHMENT QUALITY
Lodgings in Dolmenwood are classified as one of three
levels of quality: poor, common, or fancy. The lodgings,
food, and services offered by an establishment depend on
its quality. The following lists describe some of the most
common dishes served in the inns and taverns of Dolmen-
wood. Certain establishments additionally serve their own
specialities.
POOR FOOD
Poor establishments typically have 1–2 main dishes and 1
side dish available on any given day.
Main Dishes
1. Battered pizzle: The generative organs of a slaughtered
bull, sliced up, battered, and fried. Rich and gristly stuff.
2. Blood porridge: Oat porridge with a healthy portion of
bloodworms mixed in. Some folk like their worms still
wriggling.
3. Bubble and squeak: Fried up leftovers from yesterday’s
supper. Commonly a mix of cabbage, root vegetables and
meat scraps.
4. Dregger’s pie: Acorns and sloppy mixed innards baked
in a tough pastry shell. The stench when the crust is
cracked open is said to recall the back alleys of Dreg.
5. Fisher’s gruel: Grain slop cooked in a fish-bone stock.
6. Roast wellington: Layers of leftover mash, cabbage
leaves, and chicken skin, rolled up and roasted.
7. Special pasty: Butter and sheep fat pastry encasing
meaty chunks of unknown origin. Best not to ask.
8. Woad in the hole: Crispy chicken or sparrow feet poking
out of a spongy baked batter. No actual woads’ legs are
anywhere to be seen—they are far too expensive!
Side Dishes
1. Codswallop: A putrid, off-white slop. No one is quite sure
what’s in it.
2. Pig’s ear: Crispy fried hog’s ear. Nice and hairy.
3. Sourcroute: Fermented cabbage, often accompanied by
an unwanted edge of mould.
4. Wormskin: The skins of any worms that wriggle in
the region (earthworms, bloodworms, nightworms, etc.),
fermented in strong vinegar.

=== PAGE 127 ===
P a r t S i x | e q u i P m e n t , S e r v i c e S , a n D a n i m a l S
125
COMMON FOOD
Common establishments typically have 2–3 main dishes
and 1–2 side dishes available on any given day.
Main Dishes
1. Mutton roast: Slices of smoky roast mutton, slathered
in garlic gravy.
2. Onion sandwich: White bread, butter, raw onion slices,
and lashings of congealed whey.
3. Pook’s pudding: A suety pudding of mallow and locally
foraged mushrooms.
4. Puggle pie: Puggle-flesh and mushroom gravy in flaky
pastry. (Puggles are miniature fungivorous dogs that live
in Dolmenwood.)
5. Sausage and mash: Fried bog-swine sausages from Dreg
on a bed of mashed swede, potato, or carrot.
6. Shanky: A pair of chicken or quail legs wrapped in vine-
gared oak leaves and bitter mugwort.
7. Snail skewers: Forest snails skewered on metal spikes
and roast over a wood fire. Served with a dipping custard.
8. Trottel mash: Mashed root vegetables (commonly
turnip and burdock) laced with trotteling bacon. (Trot-
telings are tiny forest pigs.)
Side Dishes
1. Pickled eggs: Hard-boiled eggs preserved in vinegar.
2. Coldlanks: Raw, grated onion in a mustard and beer
marinade.
3. Hameth sprats: Little fish, crispy fried in batter.
4. Ruddy chad: A hunk of mature, red-veined cheese.
FANCY FOOD
Fancy establishments typically have 3–4 main dishes, 1–2
side dishes, and 1–2 desserts available on any given day.
Main Dishes
1. Blackbird pie: A feast of blackbirds (traditionally two
dozen whole birds!) baked in a pie crust with cream.
2. Brathering: A famed Prigwort speciality: pancakes
layered with sliced apple, cured sausage, and gooseberries.
3. Jellied lamprey: Thick-sliced lamprey in an exquisite,
spiced jelly.
4. Longmere pike: A whole pike, stuffed with leek and sage,
served with fresh forest greens.
5. Maids-o’-the-lake: A Dolmenwood delicacy: thigh-sized,
translucent pink squid fried in garlic butter. Many inns
refuse to serve this dish on nights of the full moon, as it is
said to attract the attention of witches.
6. Roast lurkey: Juicy flesh of the notoriously elusive
Dolmenwood game bird.
7. Unicorn rump: Tender venison of the deer-like beasts
known as false unicorns. The flesh of true unicorns may
only be served at the duke’s table.
8. Whole suckling pig: A whole piglet, spit-roast, complete
with an apple in its mouth. A true hero’s feast!
Side Dishes
1. Larks’ tongues in aspic: Delicate songbirds’ tongues
preserved in sweet jelly.
2. Old Shuck: Rigid slices of stinking, ultra-mature cheese
of mossling manufacture.
3. Sparrey: A melt-in-the-mouth confection of crispy,
sugared moth wings.
4. Vinegared troll moss: Sweet and sour moss, pilfered
from the moss-gardens of Dolmenwood trolls.
Desserts
1. Fondant pastries: Freshly baked, dusted with sugar.
2. Sugared plums: A taste of summer, all year round.
3. Trifle: Layered berries, sponge, custard, and cream.
4. Walnut tarts: Topped with whipped cream.

=== PAGE 128 ===
126
P a r t S i x | e q u i P m e n t , S e r v i c e S , a n D a n i m a l S
Beverages
What better than to end the day over a strident ale with one’s companions?What better than to end the day over a strident ale with one’s companions?
COMMON BEVERAGES
d8 Name Type Cost
1 Barrowblaster Beer / cider 9cp
2 Keye’s Balm Beer / cider 1sp
3 Marrowhyte Dark Beer / cider 2sp
4 Pilston’s Heartbreaker Beer / cider 4cp
5 Bard’s Cordial Spirit 2sp
6 Old Swythener Spirit 5cp
7 Prigwort Tipple Spirit 3sp
8 Mason’s Tea 1cp
UNCOMMON BEVERAGES
d20 Name Type Cost
1–2 Cobsworth Pale Beer / cider 5sp
3 Halthwidden’s Beer / cider 3sp
4 Merryweather Beer / cider 4sp
5–6 Tithelands Cider Beer / cider 2sp
7 Glubwob Specialist 2sp
8–9 Mead Specialist 12sp
10 Distillation of Dusk Spirit 7sp
11 Ether of Blue Spirit 5sp
12–13 Pokey Nog Spirit 5sp
14 Porrid’s Full Moon Spirit 1sp
15 The Night Liqueur Spirit 6sp
16 Wakelyke’s Scarlet Spirit 4cp
17 Earl Yellow Tea 5cp
18 Buckston Fizz Wine 12sp
19 Faggley’s Iced Wine 14sp
20 Inkling Wine Wine 11sp
RARE BEVERAGES
d12 Name Type Cost
1 Moon’s Milk Specialist 2sp
2–3 Nippers Specialist 5sp
4 Lord Oberon’s Ambrosial Spirit 1gp
5–6 Prigwort Pure Spirit 7sp
7 Purple Aspintheon Spirit 1gp
8–9 Tomfoy’s Tea 1sp
10 Lady Mauve Wine 3gp
11 The Cold Prince Wine 35sp
12 Underbrood’s Vintage Wine 5gp
AVAILABILITY
Beverages are stocked at inns and taverns according to the
quality of the establishment (see p124), as follows.
Poor: 3–4 common beverages, 1 uncommon.
Common: All common beverages, 3–4 uncommon.
Fancy: All common and uncommon beverages, 3–4 rare.
BEERS AND CIDERS
1. Barrowblaster: A robust ale, streaked black and white,
with a rich, iron-like flavour. Effect: Belching and goggling.
2. Cobsworth Pale: A fine, fizzing ale with a yellow hue and
the flavour of cherry syrup. Effect: Indulging brings on a
propensity for pointed philosophical debate.
3. Halthwidden’s: A gloopy, grey ale that tastes of plum
and cinnamon. Effect: Provokes indiscriminate romantic
advances.
4. Keye’s Balm: A golden ale that tastes of honey and hops.
Effect: Causes good-natured slumping.
5. Marrowhyte Dark: A thick stout as black as midnight on
a moonless night. Tastes of smoky bacon. Effect: Brings on
a woozy empathy.
6. Merryweather: A crisp, pale green, sparkling cider with
a hint of butterscotch. Effect: Grinning and redness of face.
7. Pilston’s Heartbreaker: A milky white ale that tastes
of singed elderberries. Effect: Causes a delirious state of
cackling and misdirected aggression.
8. Tithelands Cider: Sharp, amber, slightly sour. Leaves
a tingling sensation on the palate. Effect: Tranquil
daydreaming. A few drops in a poultice cures pimples,
wearing a sock soaked in it relieves melancholy.
SPECIALIST BEVERAGES
1. Glubwob: A stinking grey-green slop of aged lichen and
yeast froth. A commonplace mossling beverage. Tastes of
rank ditch water. Effect: Induces light-hearted tomfoolery
and cathartic vomiting.
2. Mead: A sweet, syrupy wine made from fermented
honey. Especially beloved by woodgrues. Effect: Induces a
cosy feeling in the belly and a light, eloquent state of mind.
3. Moon’s Milk: Exported from the mossling village of
Orbswallow. A sweet and awfully sour fermented mix of
milky and fruity liquids. Effect: Inspires jovial banter.
4. Nippers: A distillation of fermented catnip which
is a common vice among grimalkins. Insipid stuff for
non-grimalkins. Effect: Drives cat-folk wild and raucous.
Bottles and Casks
Wines, spirits, and specialist beverages can sometimes
be bought in bottles (30 coins weight) containing 5
portions of the drink for the price of 4 portions. Like-
wise, a cask of beer or cider (80 coins weight) contains
10 portions of the drink for the price of 8 portions.

=== PAGE 129 ===
P a r t S i x | e q u i P m e n t , S e r v i c e S , a n D a n i m a l S
127
SPIRITS
1. Bard’s Cordial: A frothy, orange spirit that tastes of
malted rye. Effect: Brings on a state of unexpected poetry.
2. Distillation of Dusk: A rare, ultraviolet spirit with a
lingering, oaken after-taste. Effect: Brings on a delightful
state of listless lounging.
3. Ether of Blue: A spirit with a delicate, translucent aqua
hue and a flavour akin to custard with a hint of skunk.
Effect: Inspires a state of lucid sensuality.
4. Lord Oberon’s Ambrosial: Prigwort’s finest distillation.
An insipid brown spirit tasting of sour rosehips. Effect:
Imbibers slip into a blissful reverie.
5. The Night Liqueur: A spirit of violent, greenish-purple
hue. Tasteless but highly astringent. Effect: Brings about
a soporific languor.
6. Old Swythener: A colourless spirit, tasting of charred
beech and honey. Effect: Brings on a state of rampant diso-
rientation.
7. Pokey Nog: A fermented custard, egg-yolk yellow in hue
and with a delightful, creamy flavour. Effect: Brings on a
state of rambunctious speaking in tongues.
8. Porrid’s Full Moon: A spirit of profound indigo hue that
tastes of blackcurrant. Effect: Causes cathartic bellowing
and screeching.
9. Prigwort Pure: A rich, emerald green spirit with a
flavour alike to woody salmon. Effect: Causes a state of
eloquent camaraderie.
10. Prigwort Tipple: A recent export from the cheaper
distilleries of Prigwort. An electric blue spirit that tastes
of chestnut and fennel. Effect: Inspires giddy hijinks.
11. Purple Aspintheon: A spirit of the utmost refinement.
Pale mauve in colour, tasting of bitter liquorice. Effect:
Brings on a clear-headed state in which the drinker feels
immortal.
12. Wakelyke’s Scarlet: A deep red spirit with a wince-in-
ducing, acrid flavour. Effect: Causes gagging and shouting.
TEAS
1. Earl Yellow: Dark leaves with flecks of scintillating gold.
Mild, aromatic bouquet. Effect: Calms the mind.
2. Mason’s: Finely shredded, chestnut brown leaves,
commonly drunk with milk. Favoured by the working
classes. Effect: Highly invigorating.
3. Tomfoy’s: A pale-leafed, smoky tea flavoured with
aniseed and wormwood. Favoured by intellectuals. Effect:
Clear-minded focus.
WINES
1. Buckston Fizz: A clear, sparkling wine that tastes of bitter
herbs. Effect: Brings on dreamlike visions.
2. The Cold Prince: A colourless, bubbling wine always
served on ice. The wine is said to contain fairy grapes but
is not itself produced in the immortal world of Fairy. Tastes
like pear and honey. Effect: Inspires the imbiber to feats of
romantic daring.
3. Faggley’s Iced: An ice wine imported from the far east-
ern reaches of the Duchy. Tastes of elderflower and spring
bouquets. Effect: Inspires a drowsiness punctuated with
serene visions of snowdrifts.
4. Inkling Wine: A rich, full-bodied red wine that tastes of
syrup, over-ripe plums, and hawberries. Effect: Rankles the
spirit, provoking a belligerent and arrogant mood.
5. Lady Mauve: A delicate, violet wine imported from Fairy.
Tastes of plum and charred lavender. Effect: Causes one’s
sorrows to drift away.
6. Underbrood’s Vintage: A gourmet red wine from the
legendary, deceased vintner Wayfellow Underbrood. In
dwindling supply and priced accordingly, the master’s
final fermentation is famed for exquisitely robust flavour,
with undertones of lemon zest and mead. Effect: Overin-
dulgence causes an embarrassingly rapid dissolution of
muscle control.
Inebriation (Optional Rule)
For each measure of an alcoholic drink consumed,
make a Constitution Check. Failure indicates that the
character has reached the next level of inebriation.
Levels of Inebriation
1. Tipsy: The effects noted in the beverage’s descrip-
tion become appreciable. The character suffers a –1
penalty to Attack Rolls.
2. Drunk: The effects noted in the beverage’s descrip-
tion are in full effect. The character suffers a –1
penalty to Attack Rolls and Saving Throws and gains
1d4 bonus Hit Points (these can increase the charac-
ter’s current HP total above the normal maximum).
Damage is subtracted first from the bonus Hit Points.
Any remaining bonus Hit Points are lost once Sober.
3. Groggy: The effects noted in the beverage’s descrip-
tion are in full effect. The character suffers a –2
penalty to Attack Rolls and Saving Throws. Any
bonus Hit Points gained at the Drunk level remain.
4. Unconscious: The character passes out.
Sobering Up
An inebriated character who ceases to drink loses one
level of inebriation every 2 hours.

=== PAGE 130 ===
128
P a r t S i x | e q u i P m e n t , S e r v i c e S , a n D a n i m a l S
Pipeleaf
According to many a seasoned wayfarer, smoking a soothing leaf isAccording to many a seasoned wayfarer, smoking a soothing leaf is
second to none at easing the troubles of the road.second to none at easing the troubles of the road.
PIPES
Item Cost (gp)
Bog-oak pipe 15
Cherry-wood pipe 5
Clay pipe 1
Gourd pipe (mossling style) 2
Encumbrance: Pipes weigh 10 coins.
PIPELEAF (COST PER SMOKE)
Type Cost Availability
Barley Blend 4 cp Always
Burglar’s Blend 3 cp 3-in-6
Crofter’s Daughter 5 cp Always
Dusty Abbot 2 sp 1-in-6
Fatty Lumper 7 cp 3-in-6
Flufftop 1 sp 3-in-6
Gamgy Weed 5 cp Always
The Gibbet’s Gift 7 cp 3-in-6
Green Jenny 8 cp 3-in-6
Lanksbottom Leaf 6 cp Always
Mogglemoss 18 cp 3-in-6
Mummer’s Farce 8 cp Always
Old Doby 6 cp Always
Pedlar Puff 7 cp Always
Shaggy Pony 7 cp Always
Special Shag 3 sp 3-in-6
Speckled Wyrm 25 cp 3-in-6
Wayside Wisp 25 cp 1-in-6
Westling’s Weed 2 sp 1-in-6
Witch’s Shag 8 cp 3-in-6
Encumbrance: One smoke of pipeleaf weighs 1 coin.
PIPES
1. Bog-oak pipe: A hard, black pipe carved from wood
dredged out of a peat bog. The sombre faces of ancient
bog-denizens can be spied drifting in the smoke. Said to
be the favoured pipe of wizards of all kinds.
2. Cherry-wood pipe: A fine pipe of carved cherry, produc-
ing a smooth, aromatic smoke.
3. Clay pipe: A common pipe of fired clay, often inscribed
with motifs, symbols, or script.
4. Gourd pipe: A curiously shaped, colourful gourd with
a curved stem and a plump bowl. Favoured by mosslings,
who craft gourd pipes in their hidden communities.
AVAILABILITY
Lists the chance that an item is available in a settlement
when sought. Leaf may be purchased from tavernkeeps or
wandering pedlars specialising in the trade.
PIPELEAF
1. Barley Blend: Finely chopped, golden-brown leaf with
malty undertones and a smooth, sweet taste. A cheap leaf,
favoured by farmers and ploughmen. Effect: Aids digestion
after a heavy meal.
2. Burglar’s Blend: A stringy, rough-cut mix of black and
chestnut brown leaves. Its coarse, bonfire aroma makes
it an acquired taste. Effect: Keeps one awake in the dead
of night.
3. Crofter’s Daughter: A soft, auburn-hued leaf. Its smooth
aroma carries a note of citrus. A homely leaf, beloved of
townsfolk. Effect: Makes one feel happy with one’s lot.
4. Dusty Abbot: An ultra-fine dust (can also be taken as
a snuff) of purplish-brown hue. Produces a cool, refined
smoke with the odour of rosewood and the taste of cherry.
Favoured by the noble classes. Effect: Elicits a state of jovial
eloquence.
5. Fatty Lumper: Uncut leaves, crumbled roughly. Tastes
sweet and nutty, smells of elderberries. Effect: Brings on
a ravenous appetite.
6. Flufftop: A soft, furry, golden leaf, roughly cut, glistening
with fragments of crystalline pollen. Produces a thick,
greenish smoke with a heady aroma of spice. Favoured by
Grimalkin. Some say this leaf originated in Catland. Effect:
Brings on a state of light-hearted whimsy.
7. Gamgy Weed: Slivered, semi-dried leaf of brown-green
hue. The pungent aroma has an off-putting edge of ammo-
nia, but the smoke is smooth and floral. Effect: Causes a
heavy sleepiness.
8. The Gibbet’s Gift: Ashen white dust. Produces an excep-
tionally thin, penetrating smoke that seeps across the
ground. The smoke is almost odourless, but tastes strongly
of gravy. Effect: Smoking this pipeleaf aids one in following
through with unpleasant decisions.
9. Green Jenny: Raw, rolled leaves of a variety that will
burn undried. The smoke is thin and astringent, but the
taste is sublime, with notes of apple and walnut. Effect:
Smoking this leaf in excessive quantities causes one’s
vision to take on a green tinge.

=== PAGE 131 ===
P a r t S i x | e q u i P m e n t , S e r v i c e S , a n D a n i m a l S
129
10. Lanksbottom Leaf: Chopped almost to dust, this
common pipeleaf is near black in colour and has a robust,
chocolate aroma. Grown in the warm valleys of the south-
ern High Wold. The favoured smoke of lower class breggles.
Effect: Brings on a state of merry arrogance.
11. Mogglemoss: Rich, green curls that produce a smoul-
dering, emerald smoke. The aroma is of springtime, the
taste of cheese and onion. Favoured by woodgrues, scra-
bies, and (rumour has it) the Drune. Effect: Causes an intro-
spective state in which the obscure may become clear.
12. Mummer’s Farce: A finely shredded, oak-brown leaf
with fibrous hairs. Favoured by gamblers, its pungent,
nutmeg aroma lingers in the taverns of Dreg. Effect:
Inspires jollity and hijinks.
13. Old Doby: Sumptuous, velvety, red-brown leaf with
an aroma reminiscent of the woods in autumn. Old Doby
is regarded by many as the forefather of all varieties of
pipeleaf. A common but well-loved leaf. Effect: Calms the
nerves and lightens the spirit.
14. Pedlar Puff: A rich, densely packed, sticky leaf, lustrous
near-black in colour. The smoke is thick and cloying, the
aroma like that of summer rain. Effect: Smoking this pipe-
leaf enhances the determination of foot-travellers whose
destination still lies far away.
15. Shaggy Pony: A stringy, oat-brown leaf that smells of
horse. The smoke is sweet (and also horsey) and tastes of
baked tomato. Effect: Aids deep and restful sleep.
16. Special Shag: Rich, moist, finely-cut leaf of dark,
reddish-brown hue. The refined aroma carries notes of
plum blossom. Bears the Ducal seal of approval. Effect:
Enhances good judgement in trying times.
17. Speckled Wyrm: A blend of greyish, rough-cut leaf with
strands of silver. The taste is hoppy; the smoke is woody
and is speckled with glittering, silver motes. Effect: Brings
about a state of intent concentration.
18. Wayside Wisp: A fine, supple leaf of silvery hue.
Produces coils and spirals of violet smoke, smelling of
lavender. This rare and refined leaf is said to be cultivated
in Fairy. Effect: Smoking it brings on a state of wonder
and glee.
19. Westling’s Weed: Dense, fibrous leaf of copper-red
hue. Imported from the distant west. Produces a heavy,
dark smoke with the odour of smoked fish. Effect: Inspires
dreams of travel and adventure.
20. Witch’s Shag: A blend of yellow and purplish leaves,
finely cut. The smoke is smooth and fruity. Effect: Inspires
a pleasant dizziness.
What is Pipeleaf?
The origin and nature of pipeleaf are left to the Referee’s
discretion. In some campaigns, pipeleaf may be tobacco
as we know it in the real world. In others, it may be an
entirely different plant, native to the Dolmenwood
region.
Smoking (Optional Rule)
The many pipeleafs listed in this section are assumed
to simply add flavour to the campaign world, without
having any specific mechanical effect. Groups that wish
the smoking of pipeleaf to take on a more functional
(and therefore perhaps more prominent) role in the
campaign may use the following rule.
Quiet Contemplation
When vexed by a problem, a character may sit down,
get out their pipe, and spend an hour smoking in quiet
contemplation or in debate with companions.
If the hour passes undisturbed, the player may make
an Intelligence Check. If several characters smoke and
debate together, the most intelligent character makes
the check, with a +1 bonus per 2 companions (maxi-
mum of +2). If the check succeeds, the Referee gives the
player a clue about the problem being contemplated.

=== PAGE 132 ===
130
P a r t S i x | e q u i P m e n t , S e r v i c e S , a n D a n i m a l S
AVAILABILITY
Lists the chance that an item is available in a settlement
when sought (typically from a herbalist or apothecary).
COMMON FUNGI AND HERBS
1. Arrowhame: Tiny, dried leaves of a climbing plant. Rehy-
drated and applied as a paste to diseased flesh, grants a
Save Versus Doom against a disease of magical origin.
If the save succeeds, the disease recedes within 1d3 days.
Repeat applications of Arrowhame are ineffective.
2. Blood Canker: Rust-red dried residue of a slime-mould
prevalent in Mulchgrove. Mixed with alcohol and drunk,
cures 1d3 Hit Points. Each usage of Blood Canker has a 2-in-6
chance of permanently reducing the character’s Consti-
tution by 1.
3. Bosun’s Balm: Roots dredged up from a rare river weed.
Eaten at breakfast, the herb stimulates the body’s energies,
bringing on great endurance for one day. For encumbrance
purposes, the effective weight of the character’s armour
is reduced by 50% or by one bulk category, depending on
the encumbrance rules in use. See Encumbrance, p148.
4. Fenob: The root-bulbs of a forest flower. A bulb of Fenob
placed under the tongue before bed causes the character
to recover extra 1 Hit Point if a good night’s rest is had.
5. Gillywort: A finely ground, white powder derived from
the leaves of a creeper that favours dank cave-mouths.
When the powder is added to liquid, there is a 3-in-6 chance
that it turns a shocking purple in the presence of poison. A
dose of Gillywort is enough to test one liquid.
6. Grue’s Ear: Rubbery, pink ear fungus. Consuming a spec-
imen brings on a mild psychedelia wherein the character’s
vision is tinged pink and they become sensitive to bright
light. The character’s alertness is also enhanced, granting
a 3-in-6 chance of being able to act during a Surprise Round
when their party is surprised (see Encounters, p164 for
full details on surprise). These effects last for 2d6 Turns.
Grue’s Ear loses its potency with repeated use—after each
usage, there is a 2-in-6 chance that the character hence-
forth requires an extra dose to gain a noticeable effect.
7. Hogscap: Mottled, fist-sized puffballs, harvested in
their plump, immature stage. Consumption brings on a
woozy state of mild psychedelia, with wobbling vision and
hallucinations of distant wails and keening. The character
suffers a –1 penalty to Attack Rolls but gains the ability to
sense magical influence in any object touched for 1 Turn.
The effects last for 1d6 hours.
8. Lankswith: Powdered root of a floating pond weed. Taken
as a tea with supper, cures common ailments overnight.
COMMON FUNGI AND HERBS
Item Cost (gp) Type Availability Summary of Effect
Arrowhame 100 Plant 1-in-6 Grants a Save Versus Doom against a magical disease
Blood Canker 50 Fungus 3-in-6 Cures 1d3 Hit Points; risk of losing 1 Constitution
Bosun’s Balm 50 Plant 3-in-6 Reduces the effects of encumbrance from armour
Fenob 40 Plant Always Recover 1 extra Hit Point overnight
Gillywort 50 Plant 3-in-6 Warns of poison in liquids
Grue’s Ear 200 Fungus Always Psychedelic; increases alertness
Hogscap 125 Fungus 1-in-6 Psychedelic; detect magic
Lankswith 15 Plant Always Cures common ailments
Lilywhite 25 Plant 3-in-6 +1 bonus to checks to get a good night’s sleep
Marshwick 200 Plant 3-in-6 Grants a Save Versus Doom against animal venom
Moonhaw 100 Plant 1-in-6 See in utter blackness
Ofteritch 150 Plant 3-in-6 Grants a Save Versus Doom against botanical poison
Sallow Parsley 80 Plant 3-in-6 Gain 2 extra Hit Points when resting for a day
Smottlebread 25 Fungus 3-in-6 Psychedelic; +2 bonus to Saving Throws against magic
Spirithame 80 Plant 3-in-6 Cures 1d2 Hit Points
Tom-a-Merry 150 Fungus 1-in-6 Psychedelic; see invisible
Wallowmost 150 Plant 1-in-6 Grants a Save Versus Doom against fungal poison
Wayfarrow 100 Plant Always Alleviates the effects of a forced march
Witch’s Oyster 50 Fungus 1-in-6 Psychedelic; grants an oracular vision
Wolfsbane 25 Plant 3-in-6 Wards against attacks by werewolves
Encumbrance: Each portion of a fungus or herb weighs 4 coins.
Common Fungi and Herbs
Those widely known for their practical or magical properties.Those widely known for their practical or magical properties.

=== PAGE 133 ===
P a r t S i x | e q u i P m e n t , S e r v i c e S , a n D a n i m a l S
131
9. Lilywhite: Carefully dried and folded petals of a marsh
lily. Smoking the petals in a pipe brings on a deep, soporific
state that aids sleep in harsh conditions. Smoked before
bed, the character gains a +1 bonus to any Constitution
Checks required to rest (see Camping, p158).
10. Marshwick: The seeds of a scarce and unremarkable
marsh flower, ground into a blue powder. A character
afflicted by a poison of animal origin who drinks a dose of
Marshwick with a swig of wine may Save Versus Doom. If
the save succeeds, the venom is neutralised. Repeat doses
are ineffective.
11. Moonhaw: Pale white berries of a thorny bush, only
harvested at night under the light of the moon. 1 Turn after
chewing a handful of the berries, the character gains the
ability to see normally up to 10′ in utter blackness. The
effects are short-lived, only lasting for 3 Turns.
12. Ofteritch: A black liquid fermented from the young
roots of the lantern elm. A character afflicted by a poison
of plant origin who drinks a dose of Ofteritch may Save
Versus Doom. If the save succeeds, the poison is neutral-
ised. Repeat doses are ineffective.
13. Sallow Parsley: Silvery-leafed young shoots of a rare
fern, which look uncannily like the culinary herb parsley.
On a day spent resting in safety, a character who drinks an
infusion of this herb throughout the day will recover 2 Hit
Points, in addition to the normal healing due to rest (see
Rest and Healing, p160).
14. Smottlebread: Spongy, green, bread-like hunks of giant
mushroom flesh. Consuming a chunk of Smottlebread
causes a trance state lasting 1d6 Turns, during which the
character enters into communion with the spirit of the
Smottlebread—a gargantuan, benevolent, elephantine
entity formed of green spheres. While the trance lasts,
the character is completely immobilised. Following the
trance, the character’s vision is tinged green and their
coordination is fuddled (–1 penalty to melee Attack Rolls,
–2 penalty to missile Attack Rolls). Contact with the fungal
spirit steels the character’s mind, granting them a +2 bonus
to Saving Throws against effects of magical origin. Post-
trance effects last for 1d6 Turns.
15. Spirithame: Delicate, curled leaves of a rare moss.
When crushed and applied to wounds, cures 1d2 Hit Points.
Spirithame loses its effectiveness quickly—a character only
benefits from one dose per day.
16. Tom-a-Merry: Tiny, cute mushrooms as tall as a baby’s
finger, with pointy blue caps. Consuming a dose of Tom-a-
Merry induces a hallucinatory state where time lurches
and becomes distorted. The character suffers a –2 penalty
to Attack Rolls and Saving Throws and, in combat, always
acts last in the Round. The character also gains the ability
to see invisible objects and creatures. The effects last for
1d6 Turns.
17. Wallowmost: Fluffy yellow buds of a spring plant that
flowers in Mulchgrove. A character afflicted by a poison of
fungal origin who chews and swallows a dose of Wallow-
most may Save Versus Doom. If the save succeeds, the
poison is neutralised. Repeat doses are ineffective.
18. Wayfarrow: Desiccated red berries of a thorny bush.
Chewing the berries throughout the day brings on great
vigour and stamina when marching. If the character
engages in a forced march, they have a 3-in-6 chance of
being fit for action the following day, without the usual
penalties for not resting (see Travel, p156).
19. Witch’s Oyster: Miniature, bright violet oyster mush-
rooms that grow in high tree branches. Boiling a portion
and drinking the water induces a visionary trance lasting
1d4 hours. Upon awakening, the character gains an orac-
ular insight into a topic that puzzles them. The Referee
should describe the insight to the player, determining its
accuracy by rolling 1d6: 1–2: the insight is entirely apposite
and truthful, 3–4: the insight hints at the truth in a myste-
rious manner, 5–6: the insight is entirely misleading.
20. Wolfsbane: Long sprigs of purple flowers. Werewolves
find Wolfsbane repulsive, but the bloom is odourless to
others. A werewolf must make a successful Save Versus
Doom each Round in order to make a melee attack against
someone decorated with sprigs of Wolfsbane.
Foraging
When PCs forage in Dolmenwood, in addition to
finding food, they may also come across interesting
mushrooms or herbs. These may include the useful
varieties listed here and other less well-known species
that grow in the wild reaches of the Wood. The Referee
determines the types of mushrooms or herbs found,
depending on the region of the Wood being explored.
Identifying Specimens
The species of fungi and herbs listed here are common
enough that all adventurers can identify them. Other
species require the services of a herbalist. See p161.
Selling Foraged Specimens
Herbalists and apothecaries are often interested in
purchasing herbs or mushrooms foraged from the
woods. See p161.

=== PAGE 134 ===
132
P a r t S i x | e q u i P m e n t , S e r v i c e S , a n D a n i m a l S
Specialist Services
Experts whose services adventurers at times desire.Experts whose services adventurers at times desire.
A
dventurers sometimes require services of indi-
viduals or crews specialising in various fields—
classified as specialists. The most common types
of specialists are listed here, but the Referee may detail
others as required.
Locating: Specialists wish to be known in their communi-
ties as available for hire. If a suitable specialist is resident,
locals point PCs in their direction. The DCB lists notable
specialists resident in each settlement. Others may be
found as noted under Availability for each specialist type.
Upkeep: The wages listed for each type of specialist include
the cost of any basic materials and equipment required
for their job.
Adventuring: Most specialists will not accompany PCs on
adventures, whether in the wild woods or in dungeons.
Adventurers-for-hire are described under Retainers, p134.
Shops: Common businesses that trade in goods (e.g.
armourers, herbalists, jewellers, provisioners, tailors) are
discussed under Settlements, p160.
ALCHEMIST
Availability: Cities
Wage: By job, see below
Masters of the obscure arts of purifying, mixing, and
transmuting substances to achieve spiritual and magical
effects.
Analysing potions: An alchemist can analyse the effects
of a potion, working from a small sample. Costs 200gp
and takes 1d6 days. There is a 1-in-6 chance of a false result.
Brewing potions: Alchemists brew potions to order. Costs
the potion’s standard value and takes 1d6 days per 500gp
value. There is a 1-in-6 chance of failure.
ANIMAL TRAINER
Availability: Cities
Wage: 500gp per month
Trainers are required for unusual creatures or for large
groups of common animals (e.g. dogs, horses, mules). Each
animal trainer specialises in a single type of animal.
Number of animals: A trainer can work with up to 6
animals at a time.
Time required: The time required to train an animal in
a new behaviour or trick depends on the difficulty of the
training and the animal’s intelligence. Learning the first
new behaviour typically takes one month, and subsequent
behaviours take two weeks each.
Interruptions: Training of all desired behaviours must
occur back to back. If interrupted, the animal becomes
unable to learn further behaviours.
BUILDER
Availability: Towns and cities
Wage: 25gp per week
A skilled builder and engineer who can lead construction
projects, designing the structure, sourcing materials, and
hiring work crews (included in the building costs).
Permission: Unless building in uncharted wilderness,
permission from the land owner (typically a noble house)
must be secured.
Duration: 1 week per 500gp cost of the building, to a mini-
mum of 1 month.
Building in settlements: In the vicinity of a settlement,
building costs are halved due to proximity of labour and
resources.
Residential buildings: Single storey, 30′ × 30′ building with
wooden interior stairs, doors, floors, and attic. 1,500gp for
stone walls, 750gp for wooden walls. Additional storeys (up
to three total) may be added for the same cost.
Towers: Round tower with 5′ thick stone walls. 15,000gp
for a 20′ diameter, 30′ high, 3 storey tower. 30,000gp for a
30′ diameter, 40′ high, 4 storey tower.
Strongholds: Castle wall: 500gp per 10′ long section (20′
high, 10′ thick). Keep: 75,000gp for a 60′ square, 80′ high
fortified central building. Gatehouse: 6,500gp for a 30′
square, 20′ high fortified gateway through a wall, with a
portcullis. Moat: 40gp per 10′ length (20′ wide, 10′ deep).
Drawbridge: 1,000gp for a 20′ long drawbridge.
Subterranean construction: 500gp per 10′ × 10′ area.
GUIDE
Availability: Any settlement
Wage: 5gp per day
Experts in the tracks and ways of Dolmenwood, each
guide specialising in one particular region of the Wood
(e.g. Aldweald, Dwelmfurgh, Mulchgrove, etc.).
Landmarks: A guide knows the most significant land-
marks within their specialist region (determined by the
Referee). They can lead PCs to and from these landmarks
without risk of getting lost.
Wayfinding: If the Referee determines that the party has
become lost, there is a 4-in-6 chance that the guide is able
to find the path again.
Danger: Guides sometimes enter dangerous regions, but
they charge double (10gp per day).

=== PAGE 135 ===
P a r t S i x | e q u i P m e n t , S e r v i c e S , a n D a n i m a l S
133
MERCENARY
Availability: Towns and cities
Wage: 5gp per month / cavalry 20gp per month/ lieuten-
ant 25gp per month / captain 150gp per month
Groups of unaligned soldiers-for-hire who will fight in
military campaigns. Mercenaries are hired as a company,
led by a captain, with a varying number of troops (typically
at least 20) equipped with different weapons.
Captain: Experienced soldiers and tacticians who lead a
mercenary company. A company cannot be hired without
its captain.
Lieutenant: Veterans who command a small team of
soldiers within a company. One lieutenant is required for
every 10 mercenaries.
Cavalry: Heavily armoured soldiers mounted on chargers
(see Horses and Vehicles, p120).
Standard mercenaries: Foot soldiers, some of whom may
be specialists with bows or crossbows.
Gear: Mercenaries are equipped with their own basic gear,
as listed below. The hiring character may purchase addi-
tional equipment for them if desired.
Wartime: During times of war, all mercenaries demand
double the standard rate of pay.
Adventuring: Mercenary companies refuse to delve into
dungeons or to participate in day-to-day adventuring with-
out a military objective.
Kindred: Most mercenaries are humans, but companies
sometimes include breggles or other Kindreds.
PACK HANDLER
Availability: Any settlement
Wage: 2sp per day
Semi-skilled wagon drivers, animal handlers, and porters,
useful when characters need help handling mounts,
loading and unloading equipment, driving land vehicles,
setting or watching camp, and so forth.
Danger: Pack handlers absolutely refuse to enter danger-
ous regions.
ROWER
Availability: Any settlement
Wage: 2sp per day
Unskilled labourers hired to row water vessels.
SAGE
Availability: Cities
Wage: By job, see below
Rare individuals who have devoted their lives to the study
of a single, often obscure field of knowledge. Some exam-
ples of sage specialisations: astronomy, devils, fairies,
gems, herbs, history, wyrms.
Translating script: A sage can translate any language asso-
ciated with their specialist field, costing 100gp per inscrip-
tion or per page of text.
Basic lore / item identification: A sage can identify items
and answer basic questions relating to their specialist field,
costing 200gp per consultation.
Detailed lore: More obscure questions require a period
of dedicated research lasting one or more months (as
judged by the Referee). Sages typically charge 2,000gp per
month of dedicated research. There is a 5% chance that the
research results in a false or misleading answer.
SAILOR
Availability: Any waterside settlement
Wage: 10gp per month
Trained in the handling of sailing ships and other
large water vessels. Sailors are usually equipped with a
shortsword, shield, and leather armour.
SPELL-CASTER
Availability: Cities
Wage: By spell, see below
Rare individuals willing to cast arcane spells, fairy runes,
or holy spells in return for payment.
Spell-casting: The cost is determined by the NPC, who may
require completion of a quest in addition to monetary
payment. The Referee may use the following costs, based
on the spell’s Rank, as a broad guideline: 1: 100gp, 2: 250gp,
3: 500gp, 4: 1,000gp, 5: 2,500gp, 6: 5,000gp. Spells for illegal
or morally dubious ends may cost double or more.
Runes: Treat lesser runes as Rank 1 spells, greater runes as
Rank 4, and mighty runes as Rank 6.
Standard Mercenary
meDium mortal—Sentient—any alignment
Level 1 AC 14 HP 1d8 (4) Saves D12 R13 H14 B15 S16
Att Weapon (+1) Speed 20 Morale 7 XP 10
Gear: Chainmail, longsword (1d8). 1-in-3 also has a long-
bow (1d6) or crossbow (1d8).
Cavalry
meDium mortal—Sentient—any alignment
Level 1 AC 16 HP 1d8 (4) Saves D12 R13 H14 B15 S16
Att Weapon (+1) Speed 20 (40 mounted) Morale 8
XP 10
Gear: Plate mail, lance (1d6), longsword (1d8), charger.
Lieutenant
meDium mortal—Sentient—any alignment
Level 2 AC 14 HP 2d8 (9) Saves D12 R13 H14 B15 S16
Att Weapon (+1) Speed 20 Morale 8 XP 20
Gear: Chainmail, longsword (1d8).
Captain
meDium mortal—Sentient—any alignment
Level 3 AC 17 HP 3d8 (13) Saves D11 R12 H13 B14 S15
Att Weapon (+2) Speed 20 Morale 9 XP 40
Gear: Plate mail, shield, longsword (1d8).

=== PAGE 136 ===
134
P a r t S i x | e q u i P m e n t , S e r v i c e S , a n D a n i m a l S
Retainers
Stalwart companions for journeys into places drear.Stalwart companions for journeys into places drear.
A
dventurers often require extra assistance
when journeying into the unknown, whether a
doughty fighter to guard the rear or an extra pair
of hands to hold a torch against the dark. Such characters
are classified as retainers—NPCs hired to accompany char-
acters on their adventures.
Limit per PC: Each retainer is in the employ of a specific
PC, acting under their orders. The maximum number of
retainers that will work for a PC at any one time is 4 + the
character’s Charisma Modifier.
LOCATING POTENTIAL
RETAINERS
Potential retainers may be located by frequenting inns and
pubs or by paying to post notices of help wanted.
Frequenting inns and pubs: Spending a night buying
rounds and greasing palms in drinking establishments
costs 50gp. Per attempt, there is a 3-in-6 chance of success-
fully locating applicants (see Applicants).
Posting notices of help wanted: Spending a day posting
notices in public places costs 25gp. Per attempt, there is a
2-in-6 chance of successfully locating applicants (see Appli-
cants). They apply at the specified location 1d4 days later.
Repeated searches: Each method of locating applicants
may only be tried periodically, depending on the size of
settlement: in hamlets and villages, each method may be
used once a month; in small towns, once a week; in large
towns, twice a week; in cities, once a day.
APPLICANTS
When a search for potential retainers succeeds, roll on the
Applicants by Settlement Size table.
APPLICANTS BY SETTLEMENT SIZE
Settlement Townsfolk Adventurers
Hamlet 1d2 –
Village 1d4 1
Small Town 1d6 1d3
Large Town 2d4 1d4
City 2d6 1d6
Townsfolk
Everyday folk (without a Class) willing to join an adventur-
ing party. Often used as torch-bearers or porters.
Stats: See Townsfolk Stats, below.
Starting equipment: None.
Adventurers
Independent, Level 1 adventurers of a specific Class.
Kindred: Most (4-in-6) applicants are of the dominant
Kindred in the settlement (i.e. generally humans). For
other applicants, the Referee may optionally roll on the
Adventurer Kindred table.
Class: Roll 1d20 on the Adventurer Class by Kindred table.
Stats: When an adventurer is successfully hired, their
basic game statistics (e.g. Hit Points, Armour Class, Speed)
should be established. Retainers who serve PCs for a longer
duration may be fleshed out as full characters, using the
standard character creation procedure (p18).
Starting equipment: Basic adventuring gear, weapons, and
armour appropriate to Class.
Townsfolk Stats
meDium mortal—Sentient—any alignment
Level 1 AC 10 HP 1d4 (2) Saves D12 R13 H14 B15 S16
Att Weapon (–1) Speed 40 Morale 6 XP 10
ADVENTURER KINDRED (OPTIONAL)
d12 Kindred d12 Kindred
1–3 Breggle 6–9 Human
4 Elf 10–11 Mossling
5 Grimalkin 12 Woodgrue
ADVENTURER CLASS BY KINDRED
Kindred Bard Cleric Enchanter Fighter Friar Hunter Knight Magician Thief
Breggle 1 2 3 4–8 9 10–11 12–15 16–18 19–20
Elf 1–2 – 3–8 9–12 – 13–15 – 16–17 18–20
Grimalkin 1–4 – 5–8 9–10 – 11–14 – 15–16 17–20
Human 1–2 3–5 6 7–10 11–12 13–14 15–16 17–18 19–20
Mossling 1–3 – 4 5–10 – 11–16 – 17 18–20
Woodgrue 1–5 – 6–8 9–10 – 11–14 – 15–16 17–20

=== PAGE 137 ===
P a r t S i x | e q u i P m e n t , S e r v i c e S , a n D a n i m a l S
135
OFFERING WAGES
Once an applicant has been located, the hiring PC must
explain what the job entails and offer a certain wage.
Townsfolk expect a daily rate of pay, while adventurers
ask for a share of any treasure recovered.
TYPICAL WAGES
Offer
Generosity
Reaction
Modifier
Townsfolk
Daily Rate
Adventurer
Loot Share
Mean –2 2sp 1/4 share
Poor –1 5sp 1/3 share
Standard – 1gp 1/2 share
Decent +1 5gp 2/3 share
Lavish +2 10gp Full share
Applicant Reaction
The applicant’s reaction to the offer is determined by roll-
ing on the Hiring Reactions table, modified as follows.
Charisma: The hiring PC’s Charisma Modifier is applied to
the Hiring Reactions roll.
Reputation: A penalty of –1 or –2 may be applied, if the
hiring PC has a bad reputation in the local area.
Generosity: Above or below standard wages incur a modi-
fier to the roll, as listed in the Typical Wages table.
Bonus payments: Offering to buy equipment for the appli-
cant or give them a sum of money up front may increase
the generosity modifier by 1 (up to a maximum +2 gener-
osity bonus).
HIRING REACTIONS
2d6 Reaction
2 or less Angry refusal. Hiring reaction rolls for other
applicants present suffer a –1 penalty
3–5 Refusal
6–8 Uncertain. Will accept an improved offer
9–11 Acceptance
12 or more Keen acceptance. +1 bonus to Loyalty
RETAINER LOYALTY
A retainer’s Loyalty rating reflects their willingness to stick
by PCs in the face of danger. Loyalty is initially equal to 7
+ the hiring character’s Charisma Modifier, but it may be
adjusted as follows.
Bonuses: Saving a retainer from danger or granting gener-
ous treasure rewards may increase Loyalty.
Penalties: Ill-treatment of a retainer or lack of treasure
may decrease Loyalty.
Loyalty Checks
Circumstances arise that test a retainer’s loyalty to their
employer. For example, an enemy may try to bribe a
retainer to betray their employer, or a retainer may be
tempted to flee from a situation of great peril.
Rolling a Loyalty check: In such situations, the Referee
should roll 2d6. If the roll is lower than or equal to the
retainer’s Loyalty, the check succeeds and the retainer
remains true to the hiring PC.
Unsuccessful Adventures
Optionally, the Referee may also make Loyalty checks
following unsuccessful adventures. If such a check fails,
the retainer decides to leave the PC’s employ and seek their
fortune elsewhere.
RETAINER ADVANCEMENT
Townsfolk
As non-adventurers without a Class, townsfolk do not earn
Experience Points and do not gain Levels. The Referee may
sometimes “promote” long-serving townsfolk to a suitable
adventuring Class.
Adventurers
Adventurers earn Experience Points and advance in Level
in the same way as Player Characters (see Advancement,
p25), but all XP a retainer earns is halved. This is because
retainers generally follow instructions from PCs, rather
than being directly involved in decision making.
Gaining Levels: When a retainer advances in Level and
reaches equal or greater Level than the hiring PC, they typi-
cally leave employment to go on adventures of their own.
Role-Playing Retainers
While retainers are individuals with their own person-
alities, desires, and goals, it can be cumbersome to role-
play them in detail. This is especially acute when a party
contains multiple retainers.
A common approach is for the player of the hiring char-
acter to describe retainers’ actions, essentially running
them as secondary Player Characters. The Referee may
occasionally interject, if they wish to add role-playing
elements or feel the described actions do not fit the
retainer’s personality.
Retainers as Replacement PCs
If a Player Character perishes during an adventure, a
retainer may optionally be promoted to a full PC. This
can provide instant replacements even during the
course of an adventure.
Shares of Treasure
Fractional shares of treasure are calculated by dividing
the treasure by the total number of shares. For exam-
ple, a party consisting of 5 PCs (full shares) plus one
retainer (paid a half share) discover 2,750gp of treas-
ure. The total is divided by 5.5 (five full shares plus one
half share): 500gp. Thus, each PC gains 500gp and the
retainer gains 250gp.

=== PAGE 138 ===
Part Seven
Adventuring

=== PAGE 139 ===
T
he Wood always demands a toll for your passage.
The brightest blade, the most powerful spells, and all
the tricks you’ve ever heard are never quite enough.
There’s always a price when you step beneath the canopy. So, if
you’re going, make sure you’re about your business. Yes, keep
your sword sharp and your spells ready, but make sure you
know the land, know the plan, and know your job. If you’re
clever, and have a touch of luck, you might come back with
something more than another strange tavern tale to show for
it. Oh, and never, ever go into the wild alone. Ever.”
—Tomas Left-Side, retired fighter
“

=== PAGE 140 ===
138
P a r t S e v e n | a D v e n t u r i n g
Basic Game Procedure
The basic sequence of play fundamental to a role-playing game.The basic sequence of play fundamental to a role-playing game.
W
hether adventurers are exploring the tangled
wilds, delving into ancient barrows, or brows-
ing market stalls for equipment, the same
basic sequence of play applies.
DESCRIPTION
The Referee acts as the eyes and ears of the Player Charac-
ters, relaying to the players what their characters can see,
hear, smell, and feel in the imagined game world.
Overview: When PCs initially enter an area or encounter a
creature, the Referee should give an overview of the situa-
tion and what PCs perceive. All obvious objects, creatures,
and environmental features should be mentioned. Not
everything need be described in great depth, as players
are free to ask the Referee for more detail on specifics that
catch their interest.
More detail: The Referee may sometimes mention that PCs
cannot perceive something in great detail, drawing atten-
tion to something players may wish to investigate further.
For example, PCs see a door with a sign in the distance and
the Referee says “You see a sign on the door, but you’ll need
to get closer to read the writing.”
Hidden things: Objects or creatures that are concealed
should not be immediately described. Such things may
only be discovered if PCs search in the right area.
CLARIFICATION
After listening to the Referee’s overview of the current
situation, players may ask questions to clarify what the
PCs perceive. The Referee should answer such questions
based on the PCs’ vantage point and senses.
Urgency: When an urgent threat is present, the Referee
may limit the amount of detail presented, as PCs do not
have time to look around.
No actions: The Referee should only provide additional
detail in response to questions that do not require move-
ment or other actions. Questions that would require PCs
to change their vantage point or interact with objects are
handled in the next step, Action.
ACTION
The players imagine themselves in the situation presented
by the Referee, consider it from the perspective of their
characters, and decide what to do. This is known as
role-playing.
Discussion: Presented with a puzzling or challenging situ-
ation, players may wish to discuss the best course of action,
weighing up various possibilities. This can be a very engag-
ing part of play, as long as player indecision does not cause
the game to drag out and become tedious.
Urgency: When an urgent threat is present, the Referee
may limit the time players are allowed to discuss, or may
even simply ask each player in turn what they wish to do,
without the chance for discussion among the group.
Player knowledge: It is important to distinguish between
what a player knows and what their character knows. Play-
ers should be careful to only use their character’s knowl-
edge when making decisions.
Multiple actions: If the players wish, each character may
do something different, though it is usually wise for the
party to stick together and act in concert.
Conversations and voice acting: Some groups greatly
enjoy playing out elaborate conversations with NPCs or
other PCs, acting out quirky character mannerisms and
voices. Other groups prefer to give a broad description
of what is said, rather than acting out every word. Both
approaches are fine and can even be mixed (e.g. one player
may act in character while another describes what their
character says).
The Basic Game Procedure
1. Description: The Referee describes the situation
adventurers find themselves in, depicting the
environment, any characters, monsters, hazards,
or objects present, and noting prominent smells,
sounds, etc.
2. Clarification: The players may ask questions of the
Referee to clarify any descriptive elements that are
unclear to them.
3. Action: Putting themselves in their characters’
shoes, the players discuss what to do. This could be
anything imaginable, from speaking with characters
or monsters present, to investigating or interacting
with objects or hazards, to using special capabilities
granted by their Kindred or Class.
4. Judgement: The Referee judges the result of the
proposed action, using their knowledge of the situ-
ation. Specific game rules may apply, or the Referee
may make a ruling on the specific situation.
5. Resolution: The action is resolved, making any
applicable dice rolls. Play then returns to step 1, as
the Referee describes what happens next.

=== PAGE 141 ===
P a r t S e v e n | a D v e n t u r i n g
139
JUDGEMENT
This book presents the core rules and procedures of the
game, including rules for handling the most common
adventuring situations. These rules are, however, only a
starting point—they do not cover all possible eventualities
that might emerge during play.
Referee judgement: When a situation arises that is not
explicitly covered by the rules, the Referee should clarify
with the players their intended approach and then make
a ruling about what happens.
Automatic success: In some situations—especially when
no inherent danger is involved—the Referee may simply
declare that the characters succeed without a roll of any
kind. See Is a Roll Warranted?
Automatic failure: Similarly, there are situations where
what characters are attempting is simply impossible. When
no amount of skill, perseverance, or even luck would avail,
the Referee should inform the player that what they wish
to attempt is impossible.
Ability Checks: In situations where a character’s Abili-
ties—for example, their Strength or Dexterity—are the
main deciding factor in success, an Ability Check may be
appropriate. See p22 for examples of some situations
that may be handled by an Ability Check.
Chances: In situations where a specific Ability plays no role
or where sheer luck is the deciding factor, the Referee may
judge a chance of success (e.g. as a percentage or an X-in-6
roll—see Chance Rolls, p15) and have the player roll.
Presenting the odds: When a character’s action has a
chance of failure, the Referee should make this clear before
asking players if they wish to proceed. Knowing the likeli-
hood of success or failure, players may alter their approach
or come up with alternative plans to tip the odds in their
favour.
Group discussion: It is recommended that the Referee
openly discuss their thought process when making judge-
ments. Players should not be allowed to dominate the
Referee’s decisions, but asking for input fosters an atmos-
phere of openness and fairness.
RESOLUTION
Any required die rolls are made, according to the Referee’s
judgement in the previous step. The play sequence then
begins again, as the Referee describes what happens next.
Time passing: Resolving characters’ actions usually causes
time in the imaginary world to pass. The time that passes
depends on the action taken. For example, attempting to
pick a lock requires 1 Turn (approximately 10 minutes),
while pushing open an unlocked door requires mere
seconds. The Referee should keep track of time in the game
as PC actions cause it to advance. See Time and Movement,
p146 for more details on tracking time.
Customising Rules
None of the rules presented in this book are written
in stone. If the players and Referee wish, any rule may
be expanded, altered, or removed. Such tweaks to the
rules are known as house rules—many groups end up
with their own unique way of playing, tailored to their
particular tastes.
That said, the rules have been carefully designed and
very thoroughly battle tested. Many groups will be
perfectly happy with the rules as written.
New players: Those new to the game are encouraged to
use the rules as written and establish personal tastes
before making alterations.
Is a Roll Warranted?
The Referee must judge which situations warrant a roll
of some kind (e.g. a Skill Check, Ability Check, or Saving
Throw) and which do not. For tasks with no inherent
danger and no time pressure, PCs with appropriate
skills and tools should generally succeed automatically.
As a general guideline, consider the following points.
Description: Does the player’s description of how they
intend to approach the task sound feasible?
Skill: Does the PC have the required skill to perform the
task? Characters with a specific background, Kindred,
or Class may be more suited to the task than others.
Note that all adventurers are assumed to have basic
skills of dungeon and outdoor exploration (e.g. using
ropes, lighting fires, mapping, etc.)—see Adventurer
Competency, p150.
Tools: Does the PC have any tools required for the task?
Time: Is there any time pressure?
Danger: Is there any inherent danger in failure?

=== PAGE 142 ===
140
P a r t S e v e n | a D v e n t u r i n g
Example of Play
Demonstrating the basic procedures of adventuring in the wilds.Demonstrating the basic procedures of adventuring in the wilds.
E
mily (playing Grendl Lockehorn, a Level 3 breggle
knight), James (playing Samwise Lank, a Level
3 human friar), and Jeff (playing Boots Pounce-
mouse, a Level 3 grimalkin enchanter) are camping in the
wild woods after having fled from a band of goblins in
the night. Let’s listen in as Gavin, the Referee, narrates
the scene and follows the travel procedure (p156) to see
what happens.
Gavin (Referee): You awake at dawn, after a fitful night’s
sleep in your hastily set up camp site. You now discover
what the spiky stuff underfoot was: you’re camping in a
glade of holly trees. As you didn’t get a full night’s sleep,
I’m afraid you’re all exhausted today. That’s a –1 penalty to
Attack and Damage Rolls. <Rolls on the seasonal weather
table in the DCB> Dappled sunlight glimmers down
through the forest canopy. It seems like it’s going to be a
clement day. Baby Rosemary is stirring and grumbling.
What’s your course of action for the day?
James (playing Samwise): We need to get back to a village
as quickly as we can. Rosemary isn’t ready for a life of
adventure. We’re not entirely sure where we are though.
Any ideas anyone?
Emily (playing Grendl): I say we head south. When we set
off from <checks notes> the village of Lobwall we were
heading north. So south should take us back that way.
Jeff (playing Boots): I was thinking the same. Much as I
don’t relish returning to that backwater dive, I want to rid
ourselves of this mewling infant as soon as possible.
Gavin: Sounds good. You have a quick breakfast and break
camp. Cross off a day’s rations everyone. Your party’s Speed
is 20 (due to Grendl’s heavy armour), so you have 4 Travel
Points today. <Rolls to see if the party gets lost—a 2-in-6
chance in hilly forest. A roll of 3 indicates that they do not
get lost, so they travel south as planned.> After a couple
of hours’ travel through rugged knolls and holly thickets,
you hear the distant sound of hunting horns on the wind.
Emily: Uh oh. Could that be our goblin friends?
James: We’d better not hang around to find out. Let’s keep
moving.
Gavin: OK you keep heading south. You hear distant horn
blasts a few more times, but they don’t seem to be getting
any closer. <Consulting the DCB’s description of the hex
the party is moving into> By midday the ground is flat-
tening out and you no longer hear the hunting horns. You
do notice an increasing number of trees with unsettlingly
eye- and mouth-like whorls on their trunks. You get the
feeling the forest itself is watching you. You’re heading into
an area of tangled forest, so that uses up 3 Travel Points.
You now have 1 left today.
Jeff (as Boots): “Hey trees, if you let us pass unharmed we
promise to give you some really nice… er… water to drink!”
Emily: Do we?
Jeff: Just trying to ingratiate ourselves to the locals.
Gavin: You don’t get any response from the trees. Do you
want to investigate or talk with one more closely?
James: No! We keep going.
Gavin: Alright. Late in the afternoon you come across a
road heading roughly east-west. <Decides to roll the daily
check for a random encounter at this point—a 2-in-6
chance in tangled forest. He rolls a 1—an encounter occurs!
Rolling on the encounter tables in the DCB indicates an
encounter with 7 false unicorns—a common game animal.
Gavin starts following the encounters procedure—p164.
Neither party has any prior awareness of the other, so
they’ll need to roll for surprise.>
Jeff: Great, looks like we’re on the right track. Civilisation
here we come! Well, if ten mud huts or whatever it was
counts as civilisation. But which way do we go?
Emily: No idea. <To Gavin> Do we recognise this stretch
of road?
Gavin: No. It doesn’t immediately seem familiar, but then
there’d have to be something pretty distinctive for you to
remember a random stretch of forest road. While you’re
contemplating which way to go, something approaches.
Roll for surprise! <Rolls to see if the false unicorns are
surprised. A roll of 1 indicates they’re unaware of the PCs.>
Emily: Uh oh. I’ll roll. 3! We’re not surprised.
Gavin: <Rolls to see how far away the false unicorns are.
210′, a little way down the road.> Alright. You hear some-
thing from the east. It sounds like hooves coming along
the road in your direction.
James (as Samwise): “Quick everyone, hide, someone’s
coming!” We can emerge if they look friendly.
Gavin: You find a nice thick tree trunk to duck behind
where you can peek out and view the road.
Jeff: I quietly nock a quarrel in my crossbow.
James: I give Rosemary a biscuit from my rations to keep
her occupied and quiet.
Gavin: You wait a minute in your hiding place, peeking out
occasionally. The sound of cantering hooves approaches. It
sounds like a small group of horses. Shortly, they round the
bend and you get a glimpse of them—seven white horse-
like creatures with horns on their foreheads.
Emily, James, and Jeff: Unicorns!
Gavin: As Grendl gets a closer look at them, she realises
they’re not unicorns. They’re a common, deer-like game
animal known as false unicorns. They had you fooled for
a moment.
Emily: Ohhh. I would have loved to meet unicorns.
Anyway, I guess we just let them go past. No need to try
to hunt them.

=== PAGE 143 ===
P a r t S e v e n | a D v e n t u r i n g
141
James: Maybe we should follow behind them though. A
glimpse of a unicorn (even a false one) is auspicious.
Gavin: Sounds good. So you go back down to the road and
head west. Now you’re travelling on a road, you can move
3 miles per Travel Point. You have 1 left today, so you can
travel 3 miles west. <Looking at the hex map in the DCB>
As the afternoon wears on to dusk, you find yourselves
in a woodland where the trees are festooned with dainty
flowers glowing ochre, lilac, and mauve in the rapidly
diminishing light.
Emily: Now this seems familiar. <Checks notes> Oh! Yes,
that village Lobwall was in these woods with the little
glowing flowers. We must be close.
Gavin: Unfortunately you’ve travelled as far as you can
today. You’ll need to start setting up camp. Unless you
want to press on and see if you can make it to the village?
That would count as a forced march. <Consulting the travel
rules—p156> A full day of forced marching increases
your daily Travel Points by 50%, so you would have had
a total of 6. <Making a ruling for the situation at hand>
I guess if you wanted to forced march now, we could say
you get 1 extra Travel Point. You’d be travelling in the
dark, though, and you’d have to rest all day tomorrow or
be exhausted.
Emily: Hmm, 1 Travel Point, so that would be 3 miles. We
don’t have any idea how far it is to Lobwall, so it’s risky. We
might still end up having to set up camp in the wilds. And
in the middle of the night. What do you think guys?
James: I say we camp. That way we can get settled in a good
location and hopefully get a good night’s sleep. Unlike last
night.
Jeff (as Boots): “Sounds good! I’ve got some very special
treats for you mortal folk too. Special fairy snacks to ease
the troubles of the road.”
Gavin (to Jeff): Your Conjure Treats glamour? Remember
those don’t provide actual sustenance…
Jeff: Sure, they won’t know the difference though.
Gavin: OK so you start looking for a good place to camp.
Do you want to camp on the road, beside the road, or some
way into the woods?
James: I’d say a little way into the woods, so anyone coming
along the road can’t see our campfire.
Emily: But wouldn’t we be more likely to encounter
friendly folk closer to the road?
James: I don’t think anyone friendly is going to be travel-
ling along the road in the dead of night. I’m still concerned
those goblins or their ‘Master’ might be looking for us.
Emily: Right, true. A bit into the woods then. <Jeff nods in
agreement.>
Gavin: Alright, so you head a short distance into the woods
north of the road and look around for a good spot. You find
a nice little clearing, ringed with those glowing flower trees
and carpeted with soft ferns. <Consulting the camping
rules—p158> What setup activities do you all want to do?
James: Well, we’re going to need some firewood. Maybe
Samwise can set up the campsite and look after Rosemary
while you two go looking for some dry wood? <Emily and
Jeff nod in agreement.>
Gavin: Sounds good. <Deciding today’s clement weather
means there’s no penalty to finding dry wood> Emily and
Jeff, roll 1d6 each to see how many hours’ worth of firewood
you manage to forage while Samwise sets up the campsite.
Emily: I got a 1. Sorry guys, I’m a knight. I have servants to
do this stuff for me. Or I should anyway.
Jeff: And I got a 6!
Gavin: So that’s 7 hours total. Not quite enough for the full
night, but close enough. You reconvene at the campsite,
which Samwise has now got prepared with your bedrolls
laid out and a place for a fire. What camp activities do you
want to do?
James: I’ll cook a meal. I have my cooking pots. Plus I still
have some of those tasty cured sausages we got from Dreg.
Jeff: And while he cooks I’ll entertain you all with gripping
tales of my days as a spy in the courts of Catland!
Emily and James: No! Remember what happened last time
you tried that? We couldn’t get that stupid song out of our
heads and no one got a good night’s rest.
Jeff: Boots is crestfallen. No special fairy treats for you.
Gavin: Alright, James make a Wisdom Check to see how
your cooking goes.
James: <Rolls 1d6> Great, I got a 5, plus my Wisdom Modifier
that’s a 7. Definitely a successful meal!
Gavin: Yep, you cook up some of the sausages along with
the rest of your day’s rations into a super tasty stew. You all
get a +1 to any Constitution Checks at sleeping time. So if
there’s nothing else, let’s see if anything eventful happens
in the night. Do you use the same watches?
Emily: Yep. So that’s Grendl on first watch, Boots on second
watch, and Samwise on third watch.
Gavin: OK great. You’ve got your bedrolls and a campfire
but no tents. It’s springtime. <Consults the camping rules—
p158> That means you all get a good night’s sleep. No roll.
James: Nice. I want to pray for spells in the morning.
Gavin: <Rolls for a nighttime random encounter—a
2-in-6 chance in tangled forest. He rolls a 5—no encoun-
ter.> Alright, the night passes uneventfully. You awake
refreshed—a great relief after your broken sleep the night
before. <Rolls weather for the coming day> It looks like the
warm weather of yesterday is set to continue.
James: Excellent. I say my morning prayers before break-
fast. I’ll pray for Lesser Healing, Mantle of Protection, and
Silence.
Gavin: <Knows one of the leaders of the band of goblins—
an elf knight—has been following the party. Gavin has
tracked his progress on the map and judges that he now
has a 2-in-6 chance of spotting the smoke from the party’s
campfire in the early morning. A roll of 1 on a d6 indicates
that he’s closing in.> Cool, so you finish your prayers and
the others are breaking camp and having breakfast. Roll
for surprise!
Emily, James, and Jeff: Oh no!
James: I’ll roll. 6! We’re not surprised.
Gavin: You catch the scent of freshly cut roses and hear
the padding of feet as a huge dormouse with a strangely
armoured rider charges out of the trees at you…

=== PAGE 144 ===
142
P a r t S e v e n | a D v e n t u r i n g
Preparing for an
Adventure
Advice for players on successful adventuring.Advice for players on successful adventuring.
B
efore leaving the comfort of the fireside and head-
ing into the wilds, certain preparatory steps are
essential for successful adventuring.
THE ADVENTURING PARTY
The first and most fundamental requirement for going
adventuring is the gathering of a group of like-minded
companions willing to venture forth into the unknown.
Typically, a party consists of one character per player, but
the following points should also be borne in mind.
Size: The ideal size of a group is around 6 characters—large
enough to confront the challenges of an adventure, while
not so large as to become disorganised. If not enough PCs
are present, the players may wish to hire retainers (see
p134). The Referee may also allow experienced players
to run two Player Characters at once.
Classes: It is wise for a party to consist of a mix of char-
acters of different adventuring Classes. Combat-focused
characters are essential for protecting the group from
danger, while Classes blessed with magic or special skills
excel in other aspects vital to a life of adventure.
Level: As new PCs join play, the Levels of the characters
in the party may diverge. It is recommended that char-
acters more than 4 Levels apart adventure separately, as
challenges and rewards suitable to characters of greatly
differing Levels do not match.
PLAYER ROLES
To ensure the game runs smoothly, it can be helpful to
assign certain important roles to individual players. Player
roles may be assigned on a permanent basis, if players
wish, or may be rotated between sessions.
Caller
The Caller serves as group spokesperson, responsible for
informing the Referee about the actions and movements
of the party as a whole. Delegating this role to one player—
rather than having each player informing the Referee
about their PC’s individual actions—can speed up play,
especially with large groups.
Party leader: The caller’s character usually takes on
the role of party leader. Ideally, they should have high
Charisma and be located near to the front of the party.
Switching caller: The designation of caller can change
during play. For example, the character addressing
monsters in an encounter may become the caller.
Chronicler
The Chronicler makes notes on the party’s adventures,
including monsters and NPCs encountered, battles
fought, clues discovered, and mysteries to be unravelled.
The chronicle is an invaluable tool for recalling previous
events, especially when some time has passed between
sessions. In longer campaigns, chroniclers record the
collective memory of the party’s epic adventures.
Mapper
The party Mapper creates maps of the areas explored based
on the Referee’s descriptions. Details such as monsters or
traps encountered, clues to puzzles, or interesting unex-
plored areas may be noted on the map as it is drawn.
Lost maps: Maps may be treated as in-game items, created
by and in the possession of a specific character (who must
have a quill, ink, and paper). In this case, maps must be
treated with great care, in order to prevent loss or damage
in case harm should come to the character carrying them.
Quartermaster
The Quartermaster keeps track of the party’s accounts,
tracking shared provisions, light sources, and treasure.
Splitting the Party
It is usually wise for characters to stick together when
adventuring, as there is strength in numbers. At times,
certain characters may wish to separate off from the
main party. For example, one or two stealthy characters
may wish to scout ahead of the main group.
When this happens, each group should be treated by
the Referee as a separate party, with separate Surprise
Rolls, wandering monster checks, etc.

=== PAGE 145 ===
P a r t S e v e n | a D v e n t u r i n g
143
PLANNING FOR ADVENTURE
Before starting an adventure, it is wise for players to think
through various aspects of their planned expedition. The
following are especially worthy of consideration.
Adventure Objective
While it is perfectly possible for the party to set off on the
road out of town and simply wander at random, it is usually
preferable to have a specific adventuring objective in mind.
For example, players may decide to follow up on a rumour
heard in a settlement, investigate a mysterious feature
encountered on a previous adventure, try to defeat a previ-
ously encountered monster, or locate a certain region or
dungeon.
Resources
Once an objective has been established, consider whether
any special resources are required.
Equipment: Additional equipment should be purchased
in advance, as needed. For example, characters may need
to stock up on rations for a journey into the wilds, or may
need additional torches or lantern oil for an expedition
into a dungeon.
Retainers: If the party is small or lacks characters of
certain Classes important to the adventure, consider seek-
ing retainers (see p134).
Spells: Spell-casting characters should consider the needs
of the adventure when selecting which spells to memorise
or pray for.
Cooperation: To avoid carrying redundant equipment and
ensure a balanced selection of spells, make preparation
decisions together as a group.
Marching Order
Determine the normal arrangement of characters when
exploring, known as the party’s marching order. For
example, players may decide to move in a two-column
formation, with well-armoured characters in front, weaker
characters in the middle, and a rear guard. The group may
define different standard marching orders for common
situations (e.g. standard exploration, combat, opening
doors, searching, etc.).
Dividing Treasure
Before the adventure begins, agree on how to divide
treasure amongst surviving characters. The following is
a suggested approach.
Non-magical treasure: Player Characters evenly divide
coins and other monetary treasure. Retainers (see p134)
may be allocated a reduced share, as agreed during hiring.
Magic items: Items are allocated to the characters who can
best use them or who do not already have similar magic
items. Die rolls are used to break ties.
ADVENTURING ADVICE
Following are some basic words of advice on how play-
ers can maximise their enjoyment of the game and the
chances of their characters surviving and thriving.
Work As a Team
Above all, cooperate with other players to ensure the
survival of the group and success in adventuring. While
characters may not always see eye to eye and players may
disagree on the best course of action, only those who work
together find success. This is especially important when
characters are low Level, as individual characters are
unlikely to survive the dangers of the wilds alone.
Think Outside the Box
Kindreds and Classes grant a number of special capabilities
useful during adventures. However, more often than not,
hazards, challenges, and foes cannot be overcome simply
by using traits and powers listed on the character sheet.
Careful investigation of the environment, creative use of
equipment, clever plans, and harebrained schemes can be
equally effective. See also Narrative Interaction, p150.
Use Time Wisely
Every moment that passes during an adventure presents a
chance of the party being noticed by malignant monsters
(see Wandering Monsters, p155). Resources such as rations
and light sources dwindle. Party members tire and suffer
injuries. Wise players do not waste time when adventuring.
Avoid Unnecessary Combat
There is an element of risk any time a character’s fate is
determined by a roll of the dice. This is especially acute
during combat, where a die roll can make the difference
between life and death. Players are advised to avoid
direct confrontations where possible. If combat cannot
be avoided, players should use reconnaissance, planning,
and tactics to tip the chances in their favour.
Know When to Back Out
Keep a careful eye on the party’s strength and resources.
If these dwindle too far, a retreat to safety is advisable, to
recuperate and restock. Likewise, if combat turns against
the party, do not be afraid to flee. A tarnished pride is
preferable to an ignoble death in the maw of a ravening
monster.

=== PAGE 146 ===
144
P a r t S e v e n | a D v e n t u r i n g
Core Rules
The fundamental rules used to resolve most situations of peril.The fundamental rules used to resolve most situations of peril.
M
ost situations of peril and uncertainty are
resolved using one of a handful of core game
rules: a Skill Check, Ability Check, Saving Throw,
or Attack Roll. In situations where none of these core rules
obviously applies, the Referee may simply judge a chance
of success and ask the player to roll. See Chance Rolls.
SKILL CHECKS
Skills represent specific competencies practiced by adven-
turers. All adventurers can use the Listen, Search, and
Survival skills, and some Classes grant the use of addi-
tional, specialised skills.
Rolling: Roll 1d6 and add any situational modifiers. If the
result equals or exceeds the character’s Skill Target for the
skill being tested, the check succeeds. Skills default to a
target of 6, unless the character’s Kindred or Class specifies
a lower target.
1s and 6s: A roll of natural 1 always fails and a roll of natural
6 always succeeds, irrespective of modifiers.
Kindred and Class: In cases where a Kindred and Class
grant an improved chance of success with a skill (i.e. a lower
Skill Target), use the more favourable.
When to Roll a Skill Check
Each skill applies in certain specific situations, when called
for in the rules.
Listen Checks: Rolled when a character presses their ear
to a door to detect the presence of creatures on the other
side (see Listening at Doors, p151).
Search Checks: Rolled when searching for secret doors or
traps (see Hidden Features, p152).
Survival Checks: Rolled when trying to find food in the
wild (see Finding Food in the Wild, p152).
Specialised skills: Specialised Class skills are explained
in each Class description. These skills can only be used by
characters of the appropriate Class.
ABILITY CHECKS
An Ability Check represents a test of a character’s basic
physical or mental aptitudes (one of their Ability Scores),
rather than learned aptitudes due to their Class or Level.
Rolling: Roll 1d6 and add the Modifier of the Ability being
tested, along with any situational modifiers. If the result
equals or exceeds a target number of 4, the check succeeds
1s and 6s: A roll of natural 1 always fails and a roll of natural
6 always succeeds, irrespective of modifiers.
When to Roll an Ability Check
Ability Checks apply in certain specific situations, when
called for elsewhere in the rules (see the list under Ability
Scores, p22). The Referee may also optionally call for an
Ability Check in other situations as desired.
Situational Modifiers
The Referee may apply modifiers to a Skill Check, Abil-
ity Check, Saving Throw, or Attack Roll, depending on
the difficulty of the situation.
Skill Check / Ability Check modifiers: Generally range
from –2 to +2, with a –2 penalty representing a very
challenging situation and a +2 bonus representing a
very easy situation.
Saving Throw / Attack Roll modifiers: Generally range
from –4 to +4, with a –4 penalty representing a very
challenging situation and a +4 bonus representing a
very easy situation.
Chance Rolls
In situations where no specific skill or Ability plays
a role or where sheer luck is the deciding factor, the
Referee may judge a chance of success and have the
player roll. Two common methods are judging an X-in-6
or a percentage chance.
X-in-6: The Referee judges the chance of success as a
likelihood out of 6. For example, a 3-in-6 chance for a
situation of even chances, or a 1-in-6 chance for a very
challenging situation.
Percentage chance: The Referee judges the chance of
success as a percentage. For example, a 50% chance for
a situation of even chances, or a 10% chance for a very
challenging situation.
d6 Rolls and d20 Rolls
The core rules use two different types of rolls, each with
different statistical properties.
d6 rolls: A character’s training and aptitudes (as defined
by their Kindred, Class, or Ability Scores) strongly
determine the chance of success. In the case of Abil-
ity Checks, for example, the Ability Modifier (–3 to +3)
makes a huge difference on the scale of a d6 roll.
d20 rolls: Randomness plays a stronger role in chance
of success. Ability Modifiers (–3 to +3) make only a small
difference on the scale of a d20 roll.

=== PAGE 147 ===
P a r t S e v e n | a D v e n t u r i n g
145
SAVING THROWS
Certain dangerous or detrimental effects—for example, a
banshee’s deadly wail or a wyrm’s acidic breath—call for
a Saving Throw (sometimes called a save). This is a roll to
determine whether a character succumbs to or avoids the
effect. There are 5 Save Categories, each rolled for a differ-
ent type of hazard: Doom, Ray, Hold, Blast, Spell.
Rolling: Roll 1d20 and add any applicable modifiers. If the
result equals or exceeds the character’s Save Target for
the applicable Save Category, the Saving Throw succeeds.
Modifiers: For Saving Throws against effects of magical
origin, add the character’s Wisdom Modifier. Also add any
situational modifiers determined by the Referee.
1s and 20s: A roll of natural 1 always fails and a roll of natu-
ral 20 always succeeds, irrespective of modifiers.
When to Roll a Saving Throw
The description of a spell, magic item, monster special
power, and so forth notes when to roll a Saving Throw
and which Save Category to roll against. For example, the
description of a spell may call for a Save Versus Spell.
Save Categories
Doom: Effects that instantly kill or inflict ongoing physical
malignities—for example, poison, disease, death magic.
Doom also serves as a general category for avoiding unfor-
tunate fates that do not fall under any other Save Category.
Ray: Rapidly moving, directional effects that can be
dodged—for example, energy rays, lightning bolts.
Hold: Effects that hinder or prevent movement—for exam-
ple, paralysis, petrification, falling rocks that may crush
or pin characters.
Blast: Lethal energy effects that fill a wide area—for exam-
ple, wyrm breath, explosions.
Spell: Potent, directly targeted effects—for example,
arcane or holy spells, fairy glamours, magic staves.
Choosing a Save Category
In situations not covered by the rules (e.g. when creating
new spells or monsters), the Referee must choose an appro-
priate Save Category. A simple approach is to run down the
categories list above (from Doom to Spell) and choose the
first that fits the effect in question. For very unusual effects
that don’t fit in any category, default to Doom.
Item Saving Throws
The equipment of a character killed by a destructive effect
(e.g. lightning) is assumed to be destroyed. Magic items
may be allowed a Save Versus Doom (using the character’s
Save Targets) to survive.
ATTACK ROLLS
In the chaos of combat, the sequence of feints, dodges,
parries, and glancing blows that may occur each Round
are abstracted into an Attack Roll. This roll determines
whether an attacker lands a blow on their opponent.
Rolling: Roll 1d20 and add any applicable modifiers. If the
result equals or exceeds the defender’s Armour Class, the
attack hits. Make a Damage Roll.
Modifiers: Add the character’s Attack bonus (see the Class
progression table). For melee attacks, add the character’s
Strength Modifier. For missile attacks, add the character’s
Dexterity Modifier. Also add any situational modifiers
determined by the Referee.
1s and 20s: A roll of natural 1 always fails and a roll of natu-
ral 20 always succeeds, irrespective of modifiers.
When to Roll an Attack Roll
An Attack Roll is made whenever one creature attempts to
physically harm another, whether using fists, claws, melee
weapons, or missile weapons. See Combat, p166.
Damage Rolls
The equipment list (p118) notes the damage die rolled
for each type of weapon. Likewise, the descriptions of crea-
tures with natural attack forms (e.g. claws, fangs) note the
damage die rolled.
Modifiers: Attacks with melee weapons apply the Strength
Modifier to the damage roll.
Hit Points: Rolled damage is subtracted from the target’s
Hit Points.
Minimum damage: A successful attack always inflicts at
least 1 damage, irrespective of modifiers.
Death: A target that reaches 0 Hit Points dies. Hit Points
are never reduced below 0.
Immunities: Some monsters are immune to attacks of
certain kinds. In this case, even if an attack hits, damage
is not rolled.
Recovering lost HP: Lost Hit Points can be recovered by
rest and healing. See Rest and Healing, p160.

=== PAGE 148 ===
146
P a r t S e v e n | a D v e n t u r i n g
Time and Movement
The basic rules for character movement and tracking the passage of time.The basic rules for character movement and tracking the passage of time.
W
hen exploring the untracked wilds or the
depths of the underworld, time is a critical
resource. Every moment wasted presents a
chance for malignant creatures to note the party’s pres-
ence. As time passes, light sources in dark places dwindle,
beneficial spells falter, and thirst, exhaustion, and hunger
set in. Wise adventurers do not linger, making the most of
every moment in perilous places.
TRACKING TIME
When an adventure is under way, the Referee should
keep track of the time that elapses in the imagined world,
known as game time. This is distinct from real time: what
may take the players and Referee mere seconds to describe
may take PCs hours or even days to complete.
Units of time: When characters are exploring a dungeon,
the Referee tracks the number of Turns that have elapsed;
when characters are exploring outdoors, the number of
days elapsed is tracked.
Judgement: The Referee adjudicates what characters may
accomplish in a given period of time.
Resources
As game time passes, the Referee should pay attention to
resources that the party consumes. For example: food,
water, fuel for light sources, durations of spells or magical
effects, etc.
Measures of Time: Rounds and Turns
Aside from everyday time increments (minutes, hours,
days, and so on), the following special units are used in
the game.
Turns: Approximately 10 minutes of game time. There
are 6 Turns in an hour. Time is measured in Turns when
exploring dungeons (see Dungeons, p162).
Rounds: Approximately 10 seconds of game time. There
are 60 Rounds in a Turn. Time is measured in Rounds
during encounters, especially in combat (see Encoun-
ters, p164 and Combat, p166).
Measures of Distance: Inches, Feet, Miles
Distances are measured in imperial or customary US
units: inches (notated with the ″ symbol), feet (notated
with the ′ symbol), and miles.
Conversions: 1 foot = 12 inches. 1 mile = 5,280 feet.
Measures of Weight: Coins
Weight measures typically come into play only when
discussing how much characters can carry (see Encum-
brance, p148). As coins are the most common form
of treasure found by adventurers, all weights are meas-
ured in coins (ten coins equal one pound).

=== PAGE 149 ===
P a r t S e v e n | a D v e n t u r i n g
147
TRACKING MOVEMENT
As Player Characters explore the imagined world, the
Referee should keep track of their location on a prepared
map. The map is usually kept secret from the players, who
must rely on the Referee’s descriptions of the areas they
explore.
To determine how long it takes for characters to move
from one area to the next, the Referee should refer to the
characters’ Speed (see p17).
Party Speed
An adventuring party usually wants to stay together. The
Speed of the party as a whole is determined by the Speed
of the slowest member.
Encounter Movement: Speed / Round
During an encounter, a character’s Speed indicates the
number of feet they can move each Round. This is espe-
cially relevant during combat. For example, a character
with Speed 40 can move up to 40′ each Round.
Exploration: Speed × 3 Per Turn
When exploring unknown areas of a dungeon or other
indoor area, characters can move up to 3 times their Speed
in feet each Turn. For example, a party whose slowest
member has Speed 30 can explore up to 90′ each Turn. This
very slow rate of movement accounts for PCs exploring
in a dark, unknown environment, moving carefully and
stealthily, and mapping progress.
In familiar areas: When PCs are moving through previ-
ously explored areas which they have mapped, they may
move at up to 10 times their Speed in feet each Turn. For
example, a party whose slowest member has Speed 30 can
travel through up to 300′ of familiar areas each Turn.
Running: Speed × 3 Per Round
When fleeing or pursuing enemies (see Evasion, p165),
characters can move up to 3 times their Speed in feet each
Round. For example, a party whose slowest member has
Speed 30 can run up to 90′ each Round.
Mapping: No mapping is possible when running.
Exhaustion: Characters become exhausted (see Exhaus-
tion, p151) after running at this rate for 30 Rounds. The
penalties for exhaustion last until characters have rested
for 3 Turns.
Overland Travel: Speed / 5 Travel Points
Per Day
The Referee’s map of Dolmenwood (provided in the
Dolmenwood Campaign Book) is based on a hex grid, with
each hex being 6 miles across. When travelling along
roads or in the wilds, characters gain Travel Points each
day equal to their Speed divided by 5. For example, a party
whose slowest members has Speed 30 gains 6 Travel Points
per day. Travel Points are expended as characters explore
hexes of different terrain types. See Travel, p156 for full
details on Travel Points and overland travel.
Using Miniatures
Some groups like to use miniatures along with a gridded
tabletop surface to track exploration and combat.
Play surface: The most convenient type of surface is some-
thing on which maps can be drawn with erasable pens. The
surface should be gridded for ease of tracking the move-
ments of characters.
Scale: The typical scale used is 1″ on the play surface = 5′ in
the game world.
Miniatures: Miniature figures are available to purchase
from many different companies. Alternatively, simple
tokens like dice or beads can be used.

=== PAGE 150 ===
148
P a r t S e v e n | a D v e n t u r i n g
Encumbrance
Rules governing how much gear and treasure adventurers can haul around.Rules governing how much gear and treasure adventurers can haul around.
I
n the perilous wilds, an adventurer’s equipment
makes the difference between life and death. A
rope can prevent falling into a deathly chasm,
a burning torch can fend off wild beasts, and a humble
fishing rod can provide a meal to fill hungry bellies. Char-
acters must carefully consider the equipment they take
with them when adventuring, as each person is only able
to carry so much. Each item carried is at once a burden and
a potential lifesaver in times of peril.
Two approaches to determine how much characters can
carry are presented here: one based on tracking the total
weight of items carried, the other based on tracking the
number of items carried. The Referee should decide which
to use, and it should be applied to all characters.
WEIGHT ENCUMBRANCE
This encumbrance system is based on tracking the indi-
vidual weights of items carried, giving a detailed and fairly
realistic overview of each character’s load.
Carrying Capacity
The total weight of the character’s gear is tracked. As coins
are the most common form of treasure found by adven-
turers, all weights are measured in coins. Ten coins equal
one pound.
Equipment: The equipment lists note the weight of all
weapons, armour, and items of adventuring gear. Groups
wishing to simplify tracking may treat a character’s miscel-
laneous gear (e.g. backpacks, ropes, torches, etc.)—exclud-
ing weapons and armour—as a total of 100 coins of weight.
Treasure: The weight of treasure carried by a character is
tracked. See Weight of Common Treasures.
Maximum load: The maximum load any character can
carry is 1,600 coins of weight. Characters carrying more
than this cannot move.
Determining Speed
A character’s Speed is determined by the total weight they
carry. See the Weight Encumbrance table.
WEIGHT ENCUMBRANCE
Total Weight Speed
Up to 400 coins 40
Up to 600 coins 30
Up to 800 coins 20
Up to 1,600 coins 10
Horses and Vehicles
The carrying capacity of mounts and vehicles is listed in
coins under Horses and Vehicles, p120.
Basic Weight Encumbrance (Optional Rule)
This option may be used by groups who prefer a simpler
encumbrance system based on weight carried.
Equipment: The weight of armour, weapons, and
adventuring gear is not tracked and does not count
towards a character’s maximum load.
Treasure: The weight of treasure carried is tracked to
make sure that the character’s maximum load is not
exceeded. See Weight of Common Treasures.
Maximum load: The maximum load of treasure any
character can carry is 1,600 coins of weight. Characters
carrying more than this cannot move.
Determining Speed
A character’s Speed is determined by the type of
armour they are wearing and whether they are carry-
ing a significant amount of treasure (as judged by the
Referee). See the Basic Encumbrance table.
BASIC ENCUMBRANCE
Armour Bulk 
Speed Without
Treasure
Speed With
Treasure
None 40 30
Light 30 20
Medium or Heavy 20 10
Weight of Common Treasures
The encumbrance of common items of treasure is listed
below. The Referee should decide the weight of other
forms of treasure.
TREASURE WEIGHT
Item Weight
Coin (any type) 1
Gem 1
Jewellery (1 piece) 10
Potion 10
Rod 20
Scroll 1
Staff 40
Wand 10

=== PAGE 151 ===
P a r t S e v e n | a D v e n t u r i n g
149
SLOT ENCUMBRANCE
This encumbrance system is based on gear slots, giving
a simple and abstract overview of each character’s load.
Each item carried occupies 0–3 gear slots—see Items in
Gear Slots. Characters become slower and more burdened
depending on the number of gear slots occupied.
Equipped Items: 10 Slots
Characters have 10 slots for equipped items, that is anything
the character is wearing, holding, actively using, or has
ready to use at short notice: armour worn, shields or weap-
ons held, sheathed weapons, items in a belt pouch.
Maximum load: A character cannot carry more than 10
slots of equipped items.
Stowed Items: 10 Slots / Container
Sacks and backpacks each have 10 slots for stowed items,
that is items packed away in the container.
Maximum load: A character cannot carry more than a
total of 16 slots of stowed items.
Maximum containers: A character can wear one back-
pack and can carry up to two sacks, each occupying one
hand. When carrying a sack, the character cannot carry a
weapon, shield, lantern, or other object in that hand.
Retrieving: In combat, retrieving a stowed item takes 1
Round.
Determining Speed
A character’s Speed is determined by the number of occu-
pied gear slots, shown in the Slot Encumbrance table. Track
the number of equipped and stowed items separately, look
up both in the table, and use the slowest Speed listed.
SLOT ENCUMBRANCE
Occupied Slots
Equipped Stowed Speed
0–3 0–10 40
4–5 11–12 30
6–7 13–14 20
8–10 15–16 10
Example: A fighter wearing plate mail (3 equipped slots) and
carrying a shield and longsword (2 equipped slots) has Speed
30 (5 equipped slots total). They are also carrying a backpack
containing a tinder box, 3 flasks of oil, a lantern, a rope, and
a waterskin (7 stowed items). The 7 stowed items do not alter
their Speed. If, later in an adventure, they fill a sack with 600gp
(6 stowed items, for a total of 13 stowed items), their Speed
would be reduced to 20.
Horses and Vehicles
The number of items that mounts and vehicles can carry
is calculated by dividing their coin capacity by 100 (see
Horses and Vehicles, p120). The distinction between
equipped and stowed items does not apply to horses and
vehicles.
Items in Gear Slots
The Item Gear Slots table lists the number of gear slots
occupied by different kinds of items.
General items: Unless noted otherwise, each object a
character carries occupies 1 gear slot.
Tiny items: Some very small items only occupy a
gear slot if carried in large numbers (as judged by the
Referee).
Bundled items: Some items are purchased and carried
in bundles. A bundle occupies 1 gear slot.
Containers: Containers (e.g. backpacks, sacks) only
count as an item when not in use.
Bulky items: Large or heavy objects that require
two hands to carry occupy 2 gear slots and cannot be
stowed. Very heavy or bulky objects may occupy 3 or
more gear slots, as judged by the Referee.
Clothing and armour: Clothing does not occupy a gear
slot. Light armour occupies 1 slot, Medium armour 2,
and Heavy armour 3. A shield occupies 1 slot.
ITEM GEAR SLOTS
Adventuring Gear Slots
General item 1
Clothing 0
Tiny item: e.g. bell (miniature), fungi /
herbs, holy symbol, paper or parchment,
pipeleaf, quill, whistle
0
Bundled item: e.g. candles (10), torches (3),
caltrops (20), chalk (10), iron spikes (12),
marbles (20)
1 per bundle
Container: e.g. backpack, belt pouch, sack 0 when in use
Bulky item: e.g. barrel, casket, chest, pole
(10′ long)
2
Coins or gems (up to 100) 1
Weapons Slots
Melee weapon, one-handed 1
Melee weapon, two-handed 2
Missile weapon 1
Ammunition (up to 20 pieces in container) 1
Armour Slots
Light armour 1
Medium armour 2
Heavy armour 3
Shield 1
Dropping Items
When characters discover large treasure hoards, they
may have to drop items, abandoning adventuring gear
in order to stuff their sacks with gold.
In desperate circumstances, such as when fleeing
enemies, characters may choose to drop items to
lighten their load. Weapons, shields, and even stuffed
sacks or backpacks may be dropped to increase a char-
acter’s Speed.

=== PAGE 152 ===
150
P a r t S e v e n | a D v e n t u r i n g
Hazards and Challenges
Rules for handling common adventuring situations.Rules for handling common adventuring situations.
C
haracters adventuring in the wilds or the under-
world must traverse all manner of environmen-
tal features: trees to climb, chasms to bridge,
floors and walls to probe, mysterious statues and altars to
examine, and so forth. This section presents guidelines
for handling the most common types of environmental
features, hazards, and challenges.
NARRATIVE INTERACTION
The basic game procedure (p138) serves as the funda-
mental means of interacting with hazards and challenges.
The environment is described and clarified with questions
from the group, then the characters act and the Referee
judges what happens. Sometimes a die roll is required—
putting a character’s fate in the hands of chance—but it is
often possible to bypass hazards using ingenuity, without
any kind of random roll.
Example: Exploring a cave system of crystal-encrusted grot-
toes, the party comes across a 10′ wide chasm blocking their
path. The players ask the Referee if they can jump across.
Consulting the rules for jumping (p153), the Referee says
that a Strength Check is required. Not liking the odds, the
players discuss other approaches. Could the large statue they
previously encountered be dragged here and tipped across the
chasm as a bridge? Could they attach a rope and grappling hook
to rocks on the other side and swing across?
CLIMBING
Characters can make trivial climbs in non-pressured situ-
ations without a roll (e.g. climbing into the lower branches
of a tree). In more difficult or tense situations, the Referee
may require a Dexterity Check. If the check fails, the char-
acter falls at the halfway point, suffering 1d6 damage per
10′ of the fall.
COLD
Characters travelling in extremely cold weather without
adequate protection (e.g. a winter cloak—see Adventuring
Gear, p116) lose 1d4 Hit Points per day.
DARKNESS AND BLINDNESS
Wise characters carry illumination—magical or
mundane—when exploring at night or underground. Typi-
cal light sources enable normal vision within a 30′ radius.
Low light: In low light conditions (e.g. at night without a
light source), characters suffer a –2 penalty to Attack Rolls
and move at half Speed.
Pitch darkness or blindness: Characters plunged into
darkness or suddenly blinded suffer a –4 penalty to Attack
Rolls, Armour Class, and Saving Throws and have Speed 10.
Adventurer Competency
When dealing with hazards and challenges, it is useful
to recall that all PCs, no matter their Class, are profes-
sional adventurers. Even the most bookish magician has
chosen to leave the safety of their master’s tower and
take up a life of adventure. Such a lifestyle brings with
it the following basic competencies. Adventurers can
perform these tasks under normal conditions without
a roll or check.
Camping: Finding campsites, setting up tents, gather-
ing firewood, lighting fires.
Horse riding: Basic riding and care of horses.
Mapping: Pacing out and estimating distances, basic
mapping symbols.
Rope use: Throwing, grappling, climbing, common
knots.
Swimming: Treading water, swimming short distances.
Travelling: Packing gear, route planning, basic navi-
gation.
Valuing treasure: Identifying gems, valuing trade
goods and art objects.

=== PAGE 153 ===
P a r t S e v e n | a D v e n t u r i n g
151
DOORS
Doors are a common obstacle in dungeons and indoor
spaces, restricting vision and access. Furthermore, doors
may be locked, stuck, or hidden from plain sight.
Secret Doors
Whether cunningly integrated into stonework or concealed
beneath a blanket of moss, some doors cannot be seen by
casual observation. Searching for secret doors is discussed
under Hidden Features, p152.
Locked Doors
If the correct key cannot be located, a locked door may
be broken open, opened by magic (e.g. the Knock spell,
p82), or picked by a thief (see p74).
Breaking open: A successful Strength Check, the use of
a tool (e.g. an axe or a crowbar), and 1 Turn of effort are
usually enough to smash or pry open a typical wooden
door. At the Referee’s discretion, the noise produced may
trigger an additional check for Wandering Monsters,
p155.
Stuck Doors
A stuck door is unlocked but so obstructed that it cannot
be opened without force (for example, due to being swollen
or blocked by roots).
Forcing: Characters can attempt to shoulder barge a
stuck door with a Strength Check. If successful, the door
is rapidly forced open. A failed attempt eliminates any
possibility of surprising (see Encounters, p164) any crea-
tures on the other side of the door.
Listening at Doors
Most doors do not block obvious, loud noises, but char-
acters may attempt to detect the presence of monsters
waiting quietly beyond a closed door by pressing an ear
against it to listen. The Referee then rolls a Listen Check.
Time: Each listening attempt takes 1 Turn.
Multiple characters: If space permits, multiple characters
may listen at the same door. Up to 2 characters can simul-
taneously listen at a typical door.
Retrying: Characters may listen at the same door as often
as they wish, each attempt requiring an additional Turn.
Referee rolls: The Referee rolls all Listen Checks, so that
players do not know if the roll failed or if there is simply
no sound to be heard.
Silent monsters: Some monsters (e.g. undead) cannot be
detected by listening.
EXHAUSTION
When adventuring, characters must rest at intervals to
avoid exhaustion. See Travel, p156 and Dungeons, p162.
Effects of exhaustion: Character who fail to rest suffer a –1
penalty to Attack and Damage Rolls until they rest.
Cumulative: Multiple sources of exhaustion are cumula-
tive (to a maximum penalty of –4). For example, a party
that slept poorly and has not rested while exploring a
dungeon suffers a –2 penalty.
FALLING
Falling from a height onto a hard surface inflicts 1d6
damage per 10′ fallen.

=== PAGE 154 ===
152
P a r t S e v e n | a D v e n t u r i n g
FINDING FOOD IN THE WILD
Dolmenwood is rich in tasty plants, fish, and game animals.
When on a long journey, a party may try to find food in the
wilds, rather than relying on rations purchased in a settle-
ment. The party may choose to fish, forage, or hunt—all
handled by rolling a Survival Check for the day.
Time: If characters devote a whole day exclusively to find-
ing food, without travelling, they gain a +2 bonus to the
Survival Check. Otherwise, it is assumed they are looking
for food during rest periods throughout the day.
Multiple characters: A single Survival Check is made for
each group of characters travelling together, using the best
Skill Target of all characters.
Splitting up: Characters may split into smaller groups
to improve their chances of finding food, making one
Survival Check per group, but this is dangerous: each
group has a separate chance of losing direction (p153)
and encountering wandering monsters (p155).
Fishing
Using a fishing rod and tackle (see Adventuring Gear,
p116), fishing is possible in any hex on the Dolmenwood
map which contains a lake or river. The DCB lists the kinds
of fish that can be caught.
Yield: Successful fishing provides 2d6 fresh rations.
Foraging
The DCB lists the kinds of plants and mushrooms that can
be found.
Yield: Successful foraging provides 1d6 fresh rations (1d4
in winter, 1d8 in autumn). Rare and magical herbs—only
found in certain areas of Dolmenwood—may also turn up
in the harvest.
Hunting
Successful hunting means that characters have crept up
on game animals. The DCB lists the kinds of game animals
that can be hunted.
Combat: The party must then attempt to kill the game
animals. This is handled as a normal combat encounter.
The party has surprise (see Surprise, p164) and begins
the encounter 1d4 × 30′ away from the quarry.
Yield: The party gains fresh rations based on the Hit Points
of game animals killed: 1 ration per HP for Small animals, 2
rations per HP for Medium, and 4 rations per HP for Large
(or more for extremely large creatures, per the Referee’s
judgement).
HIDDEN FEATURES
When exploring tangled woods, forsaken moors, or
benighted ruins, not all is always as it seems. Fairy doors
linger in secluded glades, forgotten towers lurk in lost dells,
and hidden doors lie concealed behind fronds of moss.
Adventurers with the persistence to look more deeply may
discover all manner of secrets.
Hidden Features Outdoors
Some areas of the Dolmenwood campaign map contain
hidden features which go unnoticed by a party simply
wandering past. Hidden features can be found by search-
ing—see Searching Hexes, p157.
Hidden Features in Dungeons
In enclosed spaces, hidden features can often be located by
narrative interaction (p150). Alternatively, players may
declare that they are searching a certain object or 10′ × 10′
area for hidden features (e.g. traps, secret doors, hidden
compartments, etc.). The Referee rolls a Search Check.
Time: Each search takes 1 Turn.
Multiple characters: If space permits, multiple characters
may search the same object or area. Up to 3 characters can
simultaneously search a 10′ × 10′ area.
Retrying: Characters may search the same object or area
again as often as they wish, each attempt requiring an
additional Turn.
Referee rolls: The Referee rolls all Search Checks, so that
players do not know if the roll failed or if there are simply
no hidden features present.

=== PAGE 155 ===
P a r t S e v e n | a D v e n t u r i n g
153
HUNGER AND THIRST
Hunger: Adventurers must be careful to pack provisions
sufficient for their journey, or be prepared to Find Food in
the Wild. Characters who go without food for a whole day
or longer begin to suffer deleterious effects as indicated in
the Effects of Hunger table.
Thirst: Water is easy to find throughout Dolmenwood, in
pools and little streams. Characters without access to water
suffer the effects of going without food (see the Effects of
Hunger table) and lose 3 Constitution per day. Death results
if Constitution is reduced to 0.
EFFECTS OF HUNGER
Days Mortals / Demi-Fey Fairies
1 –1 Attack –1 Wisdom
2 –1 Attack, –10 Speed –2 Wisdom
3 –2 Attack, –10 Speed –4 Wisdom
4 –2 Attack, –20 Speed –6 Wisdom. Lawful char-
acter becomes Neutral
5 –3 Attack, –20 Speed –8 Wisdom
6 –4 Attack, –30 Speed –10 Wisdom
7+ –4 Attack, –30 Speed.
–1 Constitution per day.
Death at 0 Constitution
–12 Wisdom. Character
becomes Chaotic
Speed reductions: Speed is never reduced below 10.
Wisdom reductions: Wisdom is never reduced below 3.
JUMPING
Long jumps: Characters can jump across a stream, chasm,
or pit of up to 5′ wide with a 20′ run-up—no roll is required.
For longer jumps of up to 10′, a Strength Check is required.
High jumps: Characters can jump over obstacles of up to
3′ high with a 20′ run-up—no roll is required. For higher
jumps of up to 5′, a Strength Check is required.
Modifiers: –1 if wearing Medium armour, –2 if wearing
Heavy armour.
LOSING DIRECTION
Getting Lost Outdoors
Overland travel is described at an abstract level, without
detailing the minutiae of winding paths and minor terrain
obstacles the party navigates. When travelling with a relia-
ble guide, following a road or river, or heading towards an
obvious landmark, there is no risk of getting lost. Other-
wise, the Referee rolls for a chance that the party gets lost
each travel day.
Chance: The chance of the party becoming lost depends
on the type of terrain being explored—see Travel, p156.
Inclement weather conditions (e.g. fog, blizzard) may also
increase the chance of getting lost.
When to roll: Typically, the roll for getting lost is made at
the start of the travel day. If the party starts the day trav-
elling along a road (no chance of getting lost), the roll for
getting lost is made when they leave the road.
Getting lost: The effects of becoming lost are described in
the Dolmenwood Campaign Book.
Getting Lost in Dungeons
Dungeon exploration focuses on the precise details of
rooms and passages the party traverses. There is no roll
to check for getting lost, but players should carefully map
dungeon areas explored. The players’ map and memories
are their sole means to maintain orientation and recall
safe routes out of the dungeon.
Getting lost: Characters who are captured, magically
transported, or who lose their map may no longer know
where they are in relation to previously explored areas.
Characters in this situation should start a new map and
attempt to find their way back to a known area. The old
and new maps can then be connected.

=== PAGE 156 ===
154
P a r t S e v e n | a D v e n t u r i n g
STEALTH
When two groups approach each other, there is a chance
that one or both is unaware of the other’s presence. This is
handled by a Surprise Roll (see Surprise, p164).
Movement and encumbrance: Exploration movement
(see Time and Movement, p146) is careful and stealthy,
so as not to automatically give away a group’s presence.
Heavily laden characters must move especially slowly, to
avoid armour or other gear making noise. This is handled
by the encumbrance rules (p148) reducing laden char-
acters’ Speed.
Sneaking
When attempting to sneak up on or sneak past a creature,
a Surprise Roll is made each Round. If the roll indicates
surprise, the sneaking party may move for 1 Round without
being detected. Otherwise, the sneaking party is spotted.
Vigilance: If creatures are actively watching (e.g. a guard
staring fixedly down a corridor, without moving), the
Referee may rule that sneaking is impossible. Most crea-
tures cannot maintain this level of vigilance for long.
Distractions: If creatures are engaged in some activity (e.g.
feeding, conversation) or distracted by a noise elsewhere,
the Referee may rule that their chance of being surprised
is increased.
Lone characters: Sometimes a single character (e.g. a thief
or hunter) splits off from the main party to scout ahead. In
this case, treat the character as a separate party with their
own Surprise Rolls.
Hiding and Ambushes
A common tactic is to hide behind some kind of cover in
order to evade detection or to surprise foes. The chance of
being spotted by casual passersby is determined by the
density of cover available, as judged by the Referee.
Complete cover: A creature fully concealed from view
(e.g. behind a wall, inside a coffer, etc.) automatically goes
undetected.
Partial cover: The Referee should judge the chance of the
creature being spotted based on the density of cover, for
example as an X-in-6 roll.
Searching: The above assumes enemies casually wander-
ing past the location where a creature is hidden. If an
enemy is actively searching, it is only a matter of time
before the hiding place is uncovered.
Ambushing: When creatures attack from hiding, the
opposing side’s chance of being surprised is increased by 1.
For example, the standard 2-in-6 chance of being surprised
increases to 3-in-6.
Example: Hearing the echoing footsteps of castle guards
approaching, a gang of burglars quickly dives behind cover.
One character jumps inside a closet and shuts the door,
another hides behind a curtain, and the third crouches behind
a statue in a corner. The Referee rules that the character in the
closet automatically goes undetected, the character behind
the curtain has a 1-in-6 chance of being spotted (their feet
are sticking out at the bottom), and the character behind the
statue has a 3-in-6 chance.
SUFFOCATION
A character can survive for up to 1 Round (10 seconds)
per point of Constitution before suffocating to death. For
example, a character with Constitution 12 can survive
without breath for at most 2 minutes.
SWIMMING
All characters can swim, unless there is an obvious reason
why a character could not have learned.
Speed: Characters can swim at half their normal Speed.
Swimming in Armour
Attempting to swim while wearing armour is perilous in
the extreme. Characters must make a Strength Check to
avoid going under, modified as follows.
Light armour: No modifier.
Medium armour: –2 penalty.
Heavy armour: –4 penalty.
Rough waters: –1 or –2 penalty, as judged by the Referee.
Drowning
A character forced underwater can hold their breath for a
short time before drowning. See Suffocation.

=== PAGE 157 ===
P a r t S e v e n | a D v e n t u r i n g
155
TRAPS
Intelligent creatures often protect their lairs and treasures
with traps to deter intruders. Concealed pits may drop the
unwary into captivity or onto deadly spikes. Envenomed
needles may be concealed in locks, ready to spring out and
poison would-be thieves. Adventurers should be wary of
such hazards and act with care.
Triggering Traps
Each trap has a trigger—an action which causes it to spring
(e.g. turning a door handle, walking into a specific area).
Chance of triggering: Many traps have unreliable mech-
anisms, due to shoddy construction, lack of maintenance,
or poor environmental conditions. When a character
performs the action that triggers a trap, there is a 2-in-6
chance of the trap being sprung. Better maintained traps
may have a higher chance of springing, if the Referee
wishes.
Failing to trigger: When a trap fails to spring, the Referee
may optionally give players a clue as to its presence. For
example, the character may hear a click or feel the move-
ment of a pressure plate, as the trap is almost but not quite
fully triggered.
Monsters and traps: Monsters often know how to safely
bypass traps in the area where they live.
Searching for Traps
Searching for traps is discussed under Hidden Features,
p152.
Disarming and Bypassing Traps
Many traps can be disarmed or bypassed by narrative
interaction (p150). See Tips for Handling Traps. Thieves
additionally have the ability to disarm fiddly, mechanical
traps (e.g. trapped locks)—see p74.
WANDERING MONSTERS
Besides the monsters noted as inhabiting specific areas of a
dungeon or outdoor region, PCs may randomly encounter
monsters on the move between areas. These are known
as wandering monsters. See Travel, p156 and Dungeons,
p162 for specific details.
Frequency: The Referee rolls periodically to determine
whether a wandering monster is encountered. The
frequency of checks depends on the type of area being
explored.
Chance: When a wandering monster check is made, the
chance of a random encounter depends on the type of
area being explored (e.g. dungeon region or level, type of
outdoor terrain).
Monster type: Each area has its own table of wandering
monsters, found in the DCB or the adventure scenario
being run. The Referee rolls on the appropriate table when
an encounter takes place.
Attracting attention: If the party is making a lot of noise
or carrying bright light sources in a dark environment, the
Referee may increase the chance of wandering monsters
being encountered.
Hiding: If the party rests quietly in an out-of-the-way loca-
tion, the Referee may decrease the chance of wandering
monsters being encountered.
Tips for Handling Traps
The following tricks are often useful when dealing with
traps.
Force: Smashing the lock of a chest with a hammer may
destroy a delicate poison dart trap without triggering it.
Jamming: A judiciously placed rock or flagstone may
be able to jam the mechanism of a trap, preventing it
from triggering.
Liquids: Water poured over a floor may trickle down
cracks, revealing a secret trapdoor or hidden pit.
Probing: Tapping ahead with a pole may trigger a trip-
wire.
Tapping: Tapping along walls listening for a hollow
sound may reveal hidden compartments.
Weight: A heavy object thrown onto a section of floor
may trigger a pressure plate.

=== PAGE 158 ===
156
P a r t S e v e n | a D v e n t u r i n g
Travel
The basic procedures for travelling and exploring in the wilds of Dolmenwood.The basic procedures for travelling and exploring in the wilds of Dolmenwood.
TIME
When travelling overland through Dolmenwood, game
time is tracked in days.
ROADS, TRACKS, AND
TRAVELLING WILD
Adventurers may at times follow useful pathways connect-
ing settlements, but they often find themselves travelling
in the wild woods.
Roads: Actively maintained roads. Parties following a road
travel quickly and have no risk of getting lost.
Tracks: Smaller paths which are seldom frequented and
sporadically maintained. Parties following a track travel
quickly but have a small risk of getting lost.
Travelling wild: All travel off tracks and roads is classified
as travelling wild. The speed of travel and chance of getting
lost are determined by the type of terrain.
MAP HEXES
The Referee’s map of Dolmenwood (provided in the
Dolmenwood Campaign Book) is based on a hex grid, with
each hex being 6 miles across. When characters travel
through the Wood, the Referee tracks their progress on
the hex map.
Players may also wish to keep a map of their own, making
notes on hexes as they explore. A blank hex map of
Dolmenwood that players can fill in as they explore can
be downloaded from dolmenwood.com.
MOVEMENT
Rather than tracking the exact time spent travelling or
the precise distances traversed, travel in Dolmenwood
is abstracted into a simple system of daily Travel Points,
representing the time taken for various travel actions.
Travel Points
A party has Travel Points each day equal to its Speed
divided by 5, as shown in the Travel Points Per Day table.
Any excess Travel Points not used by the end of the day
are lost.
TRAVEL POINTS PER DAY
Travel Points Per Day
Party’s Speed Normal Travel Forced March
40 8 12
30 6 9
20 4 6
10 2 3
Mounted: A mounted party has Speed 40.
Vehicles: A party travelling with a cart or wagon has Speed 30.
Normal Travel
A normal day of travel (whether on roads, tracks, or in the
wild) is assumed to last 12 hours, with 8 hours spent trav-
elling and 4 hours spent resting, preparing meals, eating,
setting up and taking down camp, and so forth.
Forced March
A party may push itself to travel extra distance in a day,
gaining a 50% increase in Travel Points (see the Travel
Points Per Day table). This requires a 16 hour travel day,
including 12 solid hours of travel.
Exhaustion: Following a forced march, characters must
rest for a full day or become exhausted (see Exhaustion,
p151). Characters who forced march again without rest-
ing suffer cumulative exhaustion penalties (–1 per day).
Travelling on Roads and Tracks
The Referee tracks the party’s position along roads or
tracks as they travel.
Travel Point cost: 6 miles costs 2 Travel Points, unaffected
by the type of terrain or the number of hexes passed
through. On the Referee’s hex map (DCB), roads and tracks
are annotated with 6 mile marker points.
Hex features: The party may explore any features along
the roadside in hexes they pass through. Features further
from the road are missed.
Travel Procedure Per Day
1. Weather: The Referee determines the day’s weather,
using the tables in the Dolmenwood Campaign Book.
2. Decide course: The players decide on their course of
travel for the day.
3. Losing direction: The Referee determines whether
the party gets lost, depending on the terrain.
4. Wandering monsters: The Referee makes a check for
a daytime random encounter.
5. Description: The Referee describes the terrain
passed through and any sites of interest that the
party comes across, asking players for their actions
as required. If monsters are encountered, follow the
procedure described in Encounters, p164.
6. End of day: If still in the wilds, the party sets camp
(see Camping, p158). The Referee updates time
records, with special attention to rations, spell dura-
tions, and the party’s need to rest.

=== PAGE 159 ===
P a r t S e v e n | a D v e n t u r i n g
157
Travelling Wild
The Referee tracks the party’s position on the hex map,
noting the current hex they are in.
Travel Point cost: The Terrain Types table lists the cost to
enter an adjacent hex, based on its terrain type.
Hex features: Once the party has paid the Travel Point cost
to enter a hex, they may explore any non-hidden features
in that hex without further expenditure of Travel Points.
End of day: If the party does not have sufficient Travel
Points to enter an adjacent hex, the Referee should note
how many Travel Points they have expended and how
many must be expended the next day to enter the hex.
Example: A party with 2 Travel Points remaining is travelling
from a farmland hex toward an adjacent hex consisting of bog
(3 Travel Points to enter). The party spends the 2 Travel Points
it has, nearing the edge of the bog hex but unable to enter it
today due to being 1 Travel Point short. The party makes camp
in the farmland hex. The following day the party need only
spend 1 further Travel Point to enter the bog hex.
MOUNTS AND VEHICLES
Mounts and land vehicles provide convenient means of
travelling with heavy loads, but they become inconvenient
when characters are travelling wild.
Speed and Travel Points
Mounts: A mounted party has Speed 40 (8 Travel Points per
day). While some mounts have Speed faster than 40, they
can only move at this rate for short bursts.
Land vehicles: A party travelling with a cart or wagon has
Speed 30 (6 Travel Points per day).
Terrain Restrictions
Mounts and land vehicles can travel freely along roads
and tracks, but travelling wild is limited by certain terrain
types. The Terrain Types table lists which types of terrain
mounts and vehicles may enter, with mounts only able to
be led (i.e. not ridden) in certain types of terrain.
RESTING
Characters must rest for 1 day per week of travel (i.e. 6 days
of travel, 1 day of rest) or become exhausted (see Exhaus-
tion, p151).
SEARCHING HEXES
Some hexes on the Dolmenwood campaign map contain
hidden features which stay unnoticed by a party simply
wandering through the area. Hidden features can be found
by searching a hex, requiring extra time and Travel Points.
Travel Point cost: The Terrain Types table lists the cost to
search a hex, based on its terrain type.
Hidden features: Searching may reveal hidden features in
a hex, if any are present. Once a hidden feature has been
located, it can be found again without searching.
LOSING DIRECTION
See Losing Direction, p153 for more information.
Checks: One roll for getting lost is made each day. The
Referee makes this roll at the start of the travel day. If the
party is travelling along a road (no chance of getting lost),
the roll for getting lost is made when they leave the road.
Travelling wild: The chance of getting lost depends on
the terrain being explored—see the Terrain Types table.
Following a road: There is no chance of getting lost.
Following a track: There is a 1-in-6 chance of getting lost.
Visibility: In conditions of reduced visibility, such as fog
or blizzards, the chance of getting lost increases by 1 (e.g.
2-in-6 becomes 3-in-6), and in darkness by 2.
Effects of getting lost: The effects of getting lost are
described in the Dolmenwood Campaign Book.
WANDERING MONSTERS
See Wandering Monsters, p155 for more information.
Checks: One check for wandering monsters is made each
day. The Referee may make this roll either at the start of
the day, halfway through the day (when the party has spent
half its Travel Points), or at the end of the day.
Chance: The chance of an encounter depends on the type
of terrain being traversed—see the Terrain Types table.
Creature: The Dolmenwood Campaign Book includes tables
to determine the type of creatures encountered.
Distance: Wandering monsters are encountered 2d6 × 30′
away. If both sides are surprised (see Encounters, p164),
this is reduced to 1d4 × 30′.
TERRAIN TYPES
Light Terrain
Farmland Tilled fields and lanes
Fungal forest Giant fungi, few trees
Hills Undulating grassland
Meadow Flat grassland
Open forest Light, airy woods
Moderate Terrain
Bog Treeless mire
Hilly forest Undulating woods
Tangled forest Dense, gloomy woods
Difficult Terrain
Boggy forest Wet, muddy woods
Craggy forest Broken terrain, cliffs
Swamp Wetland, sparse trees
Thorny forest Dense thorn thickets
Travel Points to enter/search: 2
Lost/encounters: 1-in-6
Mounts and vehicles may enter
Travel Points to enter/search: 3
Lost/encounters: 2-in-6
Mounts must be led, no vehicles
Travel Points to enter/search: 4
Lost/encounters: 3-in-6
No mounts or vehicles

=== PAGE 160 ===
158
P a r t S e v e n | a D v e n t u r i n g
Camping
Procedures for setting up a campsite and sleeping in the wilds.Procedures for setting up a campsite and sleeping in the wilds.
SETUP ACTIVITIES
Preparing the Campsite
At least one character must remain at the campsite to clear
away branches and rocks, set up tents and bedrolls, prepare
a fire pit, and so forth.
Fetching Firewood
Finding wood suitable for building a campfire (i.e. not
damp, rotting, frozen, etc.) can be difficult and depends
primarily on the weather.
Amount of wood: Each character who goes fetching wood
can collect enough to keep a campfire burning for 1d6
hours.
Bad conditions: The Referee may apply situational modifi-
ers to the roll for the amount of wood found, for example:
–1 for damp conditions, –2 in snow, –4 in heavy rain.
Fetching Water
Dolmenwood is riddled with little streams, pools, and
springs, making it easy to find water suitable for drinking.
Characters may refill any waterskins or other containers.
CAMP ACTIVITIES
Building a Fire
Given a means of producing flame (e.g. a tinder box, magic)
and a stash of wood (either gathered from the forest or
carried in packs), a character may build a fire. In normal
conditions, fire building automatically succeeds.
Bad conditions: In troublesome circumstances, the
Referee may rule that there is only a 4-in-6 (or worse)
chance of successfully getting a fire going.
Cooking
Given a fire, cooking pots, and ingredients (e.g. foraged
food, fresh rations, hunted game), someone may cook a
meal. The cook should make a Wisdom Check.
If the check succeeds: An especially tasty dish is produced.
Those who eat the meal gain a +1 bonus to any Constitu-
tion Checks required to rest (see Sleep), due to their hearty
supper.
If the check fails: A palatable but not exemplary dish is
produced. On a natural 1, the cook must Save Versus Doom
or produce a ruined and utterly inedible meal (burned,
spilled, etc.), wasting the ingredients used.
Camaraderie
Time spent around the fireside with one’s companions may
lift the spirits and induce restful sleep. A character may
attempt to entertain with music, song, stirring tales, jokes,
and so forth. The entertainer should make a Charisma
Check.
If the check succeeds: All characters gain a +1 bonus to any
Constitution Checks required to rest (see Sleep).
If the check fails: The attempt to entertain falls flat. On
a natural 1, the entertainer must Save Versus Doom or
incur ridicule and discord, incurring a –1 penalty to any
Constitution Checks required to rest (see Sleep).
Camping Procedure
1. Setup activities: The players decide which charac-
ters prepare the campsite, fetch firewood, and fetch
water. Any applicable rolls are made.
2. Camp activities: Characters may build a fire. Option-
ally, someone may try to cook a meal and someone
may try to entertain the group. Any applicable rolls
are made.
3. Watches through the night: Players may decide to
set a series of watches through the night.
4. Wandering monsters: The Referee makes a check for
a nighttime random encounter.
5. Sleep: Characters bed down for the night. Depending
on conditions, a Constitution Check may be required
to get a good night’s rest.
6. Waking up: Characters who slept well heal 1 HP.
Spell-casters may prepare new spells for the day.
Quick Camping (Optional Rule)
Groups desiring a quicker method of resolving camp-
site activities may rule that if the party has camping
gear suitable for the weather conditions, they automat-
ically succeed in getting a good night’s rest. The full
procedure may be used in adverse conditions.

=== PAGE 161 ===
P a r t S e v e n | a D v e n t u r i n g
159
WATCHES THROUGH
THE NIGHT
Characters often establish a series of watches through the
night, with at least one character remaining awake at all
times. The following rules may be used to handle this.
Watch durations: The party’s rest period typically lasts
around 8 hours, with 4 characters taking 2 hour watches
during that time. Characters who sleep for less than 6
hours fail to get a good night’s rest (see Sleep).
Spell-casters: Characters whose sleep is interrupted by
taking a watch have difficulty memorising or praying for
spells the following morning. See Difficulty Preparing
Spells under Sleep.
Falling Asleep on Watch (Optional Rule)
Groups wishing to add an element of slapstick and danger
may declare a basic 1-in-10 chance of each character falling
asleep during their watch. Characters with Constitution
15 or higher have only a 1-in-20 chance of falling asleep,
while characters with Constitution 6 or lower have a 1-in-6
chance.
If a character falls asleep on watch, this may throw off the
whole sequence of watches, as the character does not wake
the next person in line, and so on.
WANDERING MONSTERS
See Wandering Monsters, p155 for more information.
Checks: One check for wandering monsters is made per
night. If a nighttime encounter is rolled, the Referee may
randomly determine when during the night it occurs (e.g.
during which character’s watch).
Chance: The chance of an encounter occurring depends on
the type of terrain the party is camping in—see the Terrain
Types table (p157).
Creature: The Dolmenwood Campaign Book includes tables
to determine the type of creatures encountered.
Distance: Wandering monsters are encountered 2d6 × 30′
away. If both sides are surprised (see Encounters, p164),
this is reduced to 1d4 × 30′.
SLEEP
In ideal conditions of warmth and comfort, characters rest
peacefully and awake refreshed. Ideal conditions are not
easy to come by when bedding down among the roots and
bracken of the forest, however.
Sleep Difficulty
When camping in the wild, characters’ ability to get a good
night’s rest is determined by their equipment (whether
they have a bedroll and/or tent), their warmth (whether
they have a campfire burning), and the season. See the
Sleep Difficulty table.
Easy: The character gets a good night’s rest.
Moderate: The character must make a Constitution Check
to get a good night’s rest.
Difficult: The character must make a Constitution Check
with a –2 penalty to get a good night’s rest.
Impossible: The character fails to get a good night’s rest.
Getting a Good Night’s Rest
The character awakes refreshed by the primordial wood-
land airs, with the following effects:
Recuperation: The character heals 1 Hit Point.
Failure to Get a Good Night’s Rest
The character rises grumpy, tired, and uncomfortable, with
the following effects:
Exhaustion: The character is exhausted until they get a
good night’s rest (see Exhaustion, p151). Failure to prop-
erly sleep for multiple days incurs cumulative exhaustion
penalties (–1 per day).
Difficulty preparing spells: For each spell the character
attempts to memorise or pray for, there is a 1-in-6 chance
of failure. If the roll fails, the attempt to memorise or pray
for the spell fails—the spell slot remains empty and unus-
able this day.
SLEEP DIFFICULTY
Fire Bed Winter Spring Summer Autumn
No fire No bedding Impossible Difficult Moderate Difficult
No fire Bedroll or tent Impossible Moderate Easy Moderate
No fire Bedroll and tent Difficult Moderate Easy Moderate
Campfire No bedding Impossible Difficult Moderate Difficult
Campfire Bedroll or tent Difficult Easy Easy Easy
Campfire Bedroll and tent Moderate Easy Easy Easy
Sleeping Characters and Surprise
If an encounter occurs, all characters who are asleep
are automatically surprised (see Encounters, p164).
This may mean that some characters in the party are
surprised while others are not.

=== PAGE 162 ===
160
P a r t S e v e n | a D v e n t u r i n g
Settlements
Where weary adventurers may rest, heal, and spend their hard-earned gold.Where weary adventurers may rest, heal, and spend their hard-earned gold.
ACTIONS
Settlements present a wealth of opportunities for charac-
ters weary from the hardships of adventure. Some of the
most common activities are as follows.
Arcane Study
Arcane spell-casters can learn new spells by studying
under a mentor or by a process of research. Learning spells
takes time and requires peace and quiet. See Arcane Magic,
p78 for full details.
Earning Money
Player Characters are professional adventurers, so they do
not usually have the training, equipment, or contacts to
make a living by other means.
Using Class capabilities: Adventurers may sometimes
wish to use the capabilities of their Class to earn a bit
of money on the side (e.g. bards performing in taverns,
thieves picking pockets at a market). Characters can earn
3d6sp per day in this way.
Gossiping
Characters spending time in taverns, drinking with local
folk may hear rumours of potential adventuring interest,
determined by the Referee.
Locating Specialists or Retainers
Characters may ask around to find specialists or retainers
for hire in the settlement. See Specialist Services, p132
and Retainers, p134.
Rest and Healing
A stay in a settlement is a perfect opportunity to rest and
recuperate, healing damage accrued during adventures.
Healing overnight: Characters heal 1 Hit Point per night
when staying in a settlement.
Full days of rest: A full day of rest allows a character to heal
1d3 Hit Points. Resting precludes activity more strenuous
than reclining in an inn, supping hot food and a soothing
beverage.
Shopping
Settlements provide all manner of useful businesses where
adventurers can replenish their stocks and spend their
coin. See Settlement Services.
Visiting NPCs
Characters may spend time visiting NPCs they know in the
settlement, discussing plans, business ventures, intrigues,
and goings on in the Wood.
RANDOM ENCOUNTERS
When PCs are active in a settlement (i.e. not simply resting
in an inn), there is a 2-in-6 chance of a random encounter
during the daytime and a 1-in-6 chance during the night-
time. This is in addition to any NPCs encountered at settle-
ment locations (e.g. innkeepers, store owners, etc.).
Settlement Procedure Per Day
1. Weather: The Referee determines the day’s weather,
using the tables in the Dolmenwood Campaign Book.
2. Decide actions: The players decide on their actions
for the day (e.g. resting, shopping, researching).
3. Random encounters: The Referee makes a check for
a daytime random encounter.
4. Description: The Referee describes what happens. If
an encounter occurs, follow the procedure described
in Encounters, p164.
5. End of day: The characters return to their lodgings.
The Referee updates time records, with special atten-
tion to durations of ongoing downtime activities (e.g.
spell research).
6. Random encounters: If characters are active at night,
the Referee makes a check for a nighttime random
encounter.

=== PAGE 163 ===
P a r t S e v e n | a D v e n t u r i n g
161
SETTLEMENT SERVICES
The Dolmenwood Campaign Book describes the main
points of interest in each settlement, including the most
significant shops or services. In addition to any specific
services mentioned, the following common services are
available in most settlements.
Apothecaries and Herbalists
All settlements have a herbalist of one kind or another,
often an apothecary or a local hedge witch. Such people are
experts in the healing, magical, and poisonous properties
of herbs and fungi.
Buying fungi and herbs: See Common Fungi and Herbs,
p130.
Identifying fungi and herbs: For a 5gp fee, a herbalist can
examine and identify a specimen.
Selling fungi and herbs: Herbalists are often willing
to purchase useful (i.e. not poisonous) specimens from
adventurers at 50% of their normal value.
Banking and Money Changing
Businesses specialising in exchanging coinage and basic
banking services can be found in towns and cities.
Money changing: Coins of one kind can be exchanged
for coins of another kind of equivalent value (e.g. 1,000cp
exchanged for 10gp). The fee is 3% of the value of the coins
changed. (e.g. a 3sp fee for exchanging 1,000cp to 10gp.)
Safe storage: Funds can be left in a money changer’s safe,
with a token given to vouch for the money stored. This
service is free of charge if money is left for at least 1 month.
There is a 10% fee otherwise.
Loans: An item of double the value of the loan must be
left as a deposit. The fee is 10% of the value of the loan per
month. Well-known and respected characters (e.g. high
Level characters with land) may be able to get loans at a
lower interest rate and without a deposit.
Buying and Selling Equipment
Standard adventuring gear, weapons, and armour can be
bought (and sometimes sold) at small stores such as black-
smiths, carpenters, chandlers, leatherworkers, and so on.
Buying equipment: Common adventuring gear, weap-
ons, and armour can be bought at standard prices. Certain
items are only available in larger settlements (see Adven-
turing Gear, p116).
Selling used equipment: Stores are often willing to
purchase used equipment from adventurers at 50% of its
normal value, as long as it is in good condition.
Buying and Selling Treasure
Gems, jewellery, and art objects can be bought and sold at
specialist jeweller’s stores in towns and cities.
Buying gems/jewellery: Jewellers sell items to adventur-
ers at their full value.
Selling gems/jewellery: Jewellers purchase items from
adventurers at 80% of their full value.
Valuation (optional rule): It is generally assumed that
adventurers are able to appraise the value of treasures
themselves. If the Referee wishes to keep the value of gems
and jewellery secret, PCs may inquire at the store for a
valuation. The fee for this service is 3% of the item’s value.
Lifestyle Expenses (Optional Rule)
Instead of separately calculating the costs of inn lodg-
ings and meals, characters’ living expenses may be
abstracted into a simple daily payment based on a
chosen standard of living. This can be especially useful
for extended periods of downtime, when characters’
day-to-day activities are not played out.
Wretched lifestyle: Sleeping in back alleys, begging,
and eating scraps. A wretched character does not heal
any lost Hit Points.
Poor lifestyle: Lodging in poor quality inns or rented
rooms in an older part of town.
Common lifestyle: Lodging in common quality inns
or a rented cottage in a quiet part of town.
Fancy lifestyle: Lodging in fancy quality inns or a
spacious, rented house in the nicest part of town.
LIFESTYLE EXPENSES
Lifestyle Cost/Day Cost/Month
Wretched – –
Poor 5sp 15gp
Common 2gp 60gp
Fancy 10gp 300gp
Settlement Sizes
Settlements in Dolmenwood are classified into one of
five size categories, based on their population.
SETTLEMENT SIZES
Type Inhabitants
Hamlet 20–49
Village 50–999
Small town 1,000–3,999
Large town 4,000–7,999
City 8,000+
Buying Property
Characters may sometimes wish to purchase prop-
erty in a settlement. Use the price guidelines listed
for hiring a builder (see Specialist Services, p132).
Existing property usually costs 50–100% of the price
to build a new structure, depending primarily on the
building’s state of repair and location.

=== PAGE 164 ===
162
P a r t S e v e n | a D v e n t u r i n g
Dungeons
Procedures for adventuring in ruins, caverns, and the depths of the underworld.Procedures for adventuring in ruins, caverns, and the depths of the underworld.
DUNGEON LEVELS
Dungeons typically consist of a series of floors or distinct
regions known as levels. Adventurers usually begin explor-
ing the first level of a dungeon and may discover entrances
to the second, third, and further levels as they explore.
Dungeon levels are often connected by stairways, but
trap doors, chutes, chasms, pits, and magical portals also
sometimes provide means of moving between levels or
accessing secret areas.
Danger and Reward
Dungeon levels further from an entrance (e.g. deeper
underground) present greater challenges but also greater
rewards. More powerful monsters live in deeper levels
and guard more valuable treasure hoards. Generally, a
dungeon level presents suitable challenges and rewards
for characters of equal Level. For example, the first level
of a dungeon is suited to Level 1 characters.
TIME
When exploring dungeons, game time is tracked in Turns
(around 10 minutes). See Time and Movement, p146.
MOVEMENT
Characters move at exploration speed: 3 times their Speed
in feet each Turn (or up to 10 times their Speed through
previously explored, fully mapped areas). See Time and
Movement, p146.
Established Safe Paths (Optional Rule)
To speed up play, the Referee may choose to accelerate
travel along safe, previously explored routes through the
dungeon, rather than playing out the whole journey on a
Turn by Turn basis.
1. Length: Gauge the length of the route.
2. Time: Calculate the number of Turns required to follow
the route: divide the route’s length in feet by 10 times
the party’s Speed.
3. Resources: Check that the party has sufficient resources
(e.g. light sources) to follow the route without incident.
If resources expire part way, resume play at the point
along the route where this occurs.
4. Wandering monsters: Make wandering monster
checks as appropriate for the number of Turns required
to follow the route. If a check results in an encounter,
resume play at the point along the route where it occurs.
5. Journey: Otherwise, describe the journey briefly with-
out going into detail about each area traversed.
Dungeon Exploration Procedure Per Turn
1. Decide actions: The party decides what actions to
take (e.g. moving, searching, listening, entering
rooms).
2. Wandering monsters: The Referee makes a check for
random encounters as applicable.
3. Description: The Referee describes what happens.
If monsters are encountered, follow the procedure
described in Encounters, p164.
4. End of Turn: The Referee updates time records, with
special attention to light sources, spell durations, and
the party’s need to rest.
What is a Dungeon?
The term dungeon is used to denote any underground,
indoor, or enclosed adventuring locale. Crystal
caverns, barrow mounds, abandoned mines, ruined
castles, enemy fortresses, giant worm tunnels, unhal-
lowed crypts, and haunted manors are all examples of
dungeon locales.

=== PAGE 165 ===
P a r t S e v e n | a D v e n t u r i n g
163
RESTING
Characters must rest for 1 Turn per hour (i.e. 5 Turns of
exploration, 1 Turn of rest) or become exhausted (see
Exhaustion, p151).
Sleeping in Dungeons
Dungeons are perilous places not conducive to sleep. When
adventurers become fatigued and their resources run low,
it is usually best to retreat to the safety of a settlement to
rest. However, adventurers may occasionally wish to camp
out in a dungeon.
Getting a good night’s rest: The rules for sleeping in the
wilds may be used (see Camping, p158), choosing a
season appropriate to the dungeon’s conditions. For exam-
ple, a steamy, moss-carpeted dungeon might be treated
as summer, whereas a chilled crypt might be treated as
winter.
Campfires: Lighting a campfire for warmth is normally
impossible in an enclosed space, due to the smoke.
Wandering monsters: If adventurers set up camp in
a hidden or little-frequented corner of a dungeon, the
frequency of wandering monster checks may be reduced
(per the Referee’s judgement). See Wandering Monsters.
For example, camping behind a closed door in an out-of-
the-way area may entail a check once every 2 hours, while
camping in a secret room unknown to most dungeon deni-
zens may entail only a single check while PCs sleep.
FOOD IN DUNGEONS
The weird animals, plants, and fungi of the underworld
are sometimes edible—if adventurers dare to sample
them. Otherwise, it is advisable to bring rations on longer
dungeon expeditions (see Adventuring Gear, p116).
Spoilage: Fresh rations spoil and become inedible after 1
day in a dank environment (e.g. a typical dungeon), while
preserved rations last for 1 week.
WANDERING MONSTERS
The typical chance of wandering monster encounters is
listed below. At the Referee’s discretion, some dungeons
may have higher or lower chances of wandering monsters.
See Wandering Monsters, p155 for more information.
Checks: A check for wandering monsters is rolled once
every 2 Turns. The chance of an encounter occurring is
1-in-6.
Creature: The Dolmenwood Campaign Book includes tables
to determine the type of creatures encountered.
Distance: Wandering monsters are encountered 2d6 × 10′
away, moving towards the party. If both sides are surprised
(see Encounters, p164), this is reduced to 1d4 × 10′.
EXITING THE DUNGEON
(OPTIONAL RULE)
Characters wishing to leave a dungeon must make their
way to a known exit to return to the safety of civilisation.
Rather than playing out the whole return journey on a
Turn by Turn basis, it is sometimes convenient to use an
accelerated procedure for exiting a dungeon. For example,
some groups prefer to end each session of play outside of
the dungeon, enabling a different group of characters and
players to reconvene in the next session. In such situations,
one of the following procedures may be used.
Option 1: Established Safe Paths
If players know of a safe, previously explored route to a
dungeon exit, the procedure listed under Movement may
be used.
Option 2: Dungeon Escape Roll
This option strongly encourages players to exit the
dungeon at the end of each game session. Characters who
do not exit the dungeon in a timely manner risk an uncer-
tain doom determined by random rolls. Each character
must Save Versus Doom (with modifiers listed below) to
escape unscathed. If the save fails, the player must roll on
the Dungeon Doom table to determine their character’s
fate.
Dungeon level: –1 Saving Throw penalty for each dungeon
level beyond the first. (e.g. –3 penalty when exploring the
fourth level.)
Mapped location: +2 Saving Throw bonus if characters
have a map indicating their location.
Clear path: +4 Saving Throw bonus if characters know a
safe, previously explored route to an exit.
Dungeon size: The Referee may apply a Saving Throw
bonus for very small dungeons or a penalty for especially
sprawling dungeons.
DUNGEON DOOM
d10 Result
1 Escaped. 1d6 random items of equipment lost.
2 Escaped. 1 Hit Point remaining.
3 Escaped. 1 Hit Point remaining and a permanent
loss of 1 point from a random Ability Score.
4 Lost. Wandering alone in the dungeon or captured
by monsters. 3-in-6 chance the party knows the lost
character’s location.
5 Lost. Transformed into or controlled by a monster.
(Alternatively, the character escapes but has been
replaced by a doppelgänger of some kind.)
6 Dead. Companions were able to loot the body or
bring it with them.
7 Dead. Companions know the location of the body.
8 Dead. Body and equipment are intact, but compan-
ions do not know their location.
9 Dead. Body and equipment are destroyed.
10 Betrayal. Roll on this table again (re-rolling further
results of 10). The player may choose to switch their
character’s fate with that of a companion.

=== PAGE 166 ===
164
P a r t S e v e n | a D v e n t u r i n g
Encounters
When adventurers meet strangers, foes, or monsters in the wilds.When adventurers meet strangers, foes, or monsters in the wilds.
AWARENESS
Sometimes one group is already aware of the other’s pres-
ence, negating the chance of being surprised. The Referee
should judge this based on the situation—e.g. a group
making a lot of noise or carrying a light in the dark usually
makes its presence known to others at some distance.
Example: An adventuring party exploring a dank cave
network approaches the cobweb-strewn lair of a giant spider.
The spider has spotted the approaching party’s torch light and
lies quietly in wait. The spider does not need to make a Surprise
Roll, but the party will.
SURPRISE
A Surprise Roll is made for any side that is not already
aware of the other’s presence. See Stealth, p154 for more
details on avoiding detection.
Surprise Rolls: Each side unaware of the other’s presence
rolls to see if they are surprised. One player rolls for the
adventuring party as a whole, and the Referee rolls for
each other side.
Chance of being surprised: The standard chance of a side
being surprised is 2-in-6. This may be modified in certain
situations. For example, attacking from hiding (see Stealth,
p154) increases the chance of the opposing side being
surprised by 1, to 3-in-6.
Effects of Surprise
Neither side surprised: Neither side has any advantage.
One side surprised: The unsurprised side gains a 1 Round
advantage, during which the surprised side cannot act.
Both sides surprised: There is simply a momentary confu-
sion—neither side has any advantage.
ENCOUNTER DISTANCE
The situation in which an encounter occurs often deter-
mines the distance between the two sides. If there is uncer-
tainty, determine the distance randomly.
Dungeon: 2d6 × 10′. (1d4 × 10′ if both sides are surprised.)
Outdoors: 2d6 × 30′. (1d4 × 30′ if both sides are surprised.)
Effects of Encounter Distance
Awareness: Encounter distance indicates the distance at
which one or both sides (determined by surprise) become
aware of the other. This may be due to sighting, scent,
sounds of movement, and so on.
Direction: Unless the situation dictates otherwise, both
sides are headed roughly towards each other.
Encounter Sequence
1. Awareness: The Referee establishes whether either
side is already aware of the other.
2. Surprise: The Referee rolls for surprise, if applicable.
3. Encounter distance: The Referee determines the
distance between the two sides.
4. Initiative: Any sides that are not surprised roll initi-
ative to determine who acts first.
5. Actions: Any sides that are not surprised decide how
they will respond to the encounter. The encounter is
played out accordingly.
6. Conclusion: One Turn has passed.
Sides
Typically there are two sides in an encounter—a PC
adventuring party and a group of NPCs or monsters.
It is possible to have more than two sides in situations
where multiple independent groups meet.

=== PAGE 167 ===
P a r t S e v e n | a D v e n t u r i n g
165
INITIATIVE
Initiative determines which side acts first in an encounter.
Initiative Rolls: Each side rolls 1d6. One player rolls for
the adventuring party as a whole, and the Referee rolls for
each other side.
Highest roll wins: The side with the highest roll acts first,
followed by other sides in order from highest to lowest
initiative.
Ties: Either both sides may roll again, or actions on both
sides may be resolved simultaneously.
Waiting: A side may choose to voluntarily lose initiative,
waiting to react to the other side’s actions.
ACTIONS
The players decide their characters’ actions and the Referee
determines the actions of other sides (see Monster and
NPC Reactions). The following actions are common.
Attacking
If one side attacks, casts spells, or makes tactical move-
ment, follow the procedure under Combat, p166. Use the
previously rolled initiative for the first Round of combat,
re-rolling in the second and subsequent Rounds.
Evasion
If one side wishes to avoid an encounter, it may attempt
to flee. The opposing side must decide whether or not to
pursue.
Surprise: If not obviously visible, a side with surprise may
avoid the encounter altogether by turning back, waiting
quietly, or attempting to sneak past.
Choosing to pursue: Players decide whether to pursue
fleeing monsters or NPCs. The Referee decides whether
monsters or NPCs pursue fleeing PCs, based on their dispo-
sition (possibly making a Reaction Roll—see Monster and
NPC Reactions). If the opposing side decides to let the other
side flee, then the encounter is avoided.
Pursuit: If the opposing side gives chase, it is assumed that
both sides are running—moving at 3 times their Speed in
feet per Round (see Time and Movement, p146). Game
time proceeds in Rounds, with the location of the two sides
carefully tracked to determine their relative positions.
Ending a pursuit: A pursuit ends if the fleeing side is
caught or if the pursuing side decides to give up the chase.
Monsters often break off a pursuit if they lose sight of char-
acters (as determined by the Referee).
Obstacles and distractions: The fleeing side may create
obstacles to block pursuit (e.g. burning oil) or drop items
to distract pursuers. Creatures that value wealth may stop
pursuit if characters drop treasure (3-in-6 chance), and
ravenous creatures may stop pursuit if characters drop
food (3-in-6 chance).
Parley
A side may attempt to communicate with the other. If
PCs begin an encounter with an attempt to parley, the
Charisma of the speaking character can influence the other
side’s reaction. See Monster and NPC Reactions.
Waiting
A side may decide to wait to see how the other side acts,
essentially forfeiting any element of surprise or initiative
it may have had.
CONCLUSION
An encounter is assumed to take at least one full Turn to
complete, including time to rest, regroup, clean weapons,
bind wounds, and so on, afterwards.
Monster and NPC Reactions
Circumstances often make it obvious how a monster
or NPC will react upon encountering adventurers. If
unsure, the Referee may make a Reaction Roll.
Reaction Rolls: Roll 2d6 on the Encounter Reactions
table to determine a creature’s initial disposition when
encountered.
Charisma: When parleying, the Charisma Modifier of
the speaking PC is applied to Reaction Rolls.
ENCOUNTER REACTIONS
2d6 Reaction
2 or less Attacks
3–5 Hostile, may attack
6–8 Uncertain, wary
9–11 Indifferent, may negotiate
12 or more Eager, friendly

=== PAGE 168 ===
166
P a r t S e v e n | a D v e n t u r i n g
Combat
When swords are drawn and an encounter turns to violence.When swords are drawn and an encounter turns to violence.
TIME
During combat, game time is tracked in Rounds (about 10
seconds). See Time and Movement, p146.
ACTIONS PER ROUND
Combatants may move and perform one action each
Round. Those wishing to cast a spell or use a fairy rune
may not move in the same Round.
Common Actions
The following count as a combatant’s action for the Round.
For other actions, the Referee must judge what is feasible
within the space of a Round.
▶ Make an attack.
▶ Cast a spell, use a rune, or use a glamour.
▶ Drink a potion.
▶ Activate a magic item.
The Referee may allow combatants to take momentary
actions (e.g. shouting a few words, dropping a held object)
in addition to their main action for the Round.
DECLARATIONS
Certain actions must be declared before initiative is rolled,
as they have consequences for the side that loses initiative.
Declaration applies to all combatants, whether controlled
by players or by the Referee.
Spells and runes: The intention to cast a spell or use a
fairy rune this Round must be declared. The spell or rune
is disrupted if the caster loses initiative and is harmed.
Fleeing from melee: The intention to flee from melee this
Round must be declared. Opponents that win initiative
may attack the fleeing combatant with a bonus.
Other actions: Need not be declared.
INITIATIVE
Initiative determines which side acts first each Round.
Initiative Rolls: Each side rolls 1d6. One player rolls for
the adventuring party as a whole, and the Referee rolls for
each other side.
Highest roll wins: The side with the highest roll acts first,
followed by other sides in order from highest to lowest
initiative.
Ties: Either both sides may roll again, or actions on both
sides may be resolved simultaneously.
Waiting: A side may choose to voluntarily lose initiative,
waiting to react to the other side’s actions.
Combat Procedure Per Round
1. Declarations: The intent to cast a spell, use a fairy
rune, or retreat from melee must be declared.
2. Initiative: Each side rolls 1d6 to determine which
side acts first. Highest acts first.
3. Winning side acts: Actions of combatants on the
winning side are handled in the following sequence:
a. Movement: Combatants may not move when
casting a spell.
b. Missile attacks: Fired or thrown attacks.
c. Magic: Spells, runes, glamours, magic items,
turning the undead.
d. Melee attacks: And other actions.
4. Other sides act: Repeat steps 3a to 3d for each side,
in order of initiative (highest first).
5. Morale: The Referee makes a Morale Check for
monsters and NPCs, if applicable.
Sides
Typically there are two sides in a combat encounter—a
PC adventuring party and a group of NPCs or monsters.
It is possible to have more than two sides in situations
where multiple independent groups meet.
In Melee
Two combatants are treated as being in melee if they are
positioned within 5′ and one or both has made a melee
attack against the other.

=== PAGE 169 ===
P a r t S e v e n | a D v e n t u r i n g
167
MOVEMENT
When in Melee
Combatants can move up to half their Speed in feet per
Round.
Fleeing from melee: A combatant wishing to move at
greater than half Speed must turn and flee melee, forfeit-
ing their attack this Round. Opponents in melee with a
retreating combatant gain a +2 Attack bonus against them
this Round and ignore any AC bonus from their shield.
Outside of Melee
Combatants can move up to their Speed in feet per Round.
Fleeing an encounter: Combatants not in melee may flee a
combat encounter, beginning running movement (3 times
Speed in feet per Round—see Time and Movement, p146)
and using the rules for evasion (p165).
ATTACKS
Melee attacks are possible when opponents are 5′ or less
from each other. Missile attacks are possible when oppo-
nents are more than 5′ from one another. See Attack Rolls,
p145 for full details on making an Attack Roll.
Attack Modifiers
Melee: Strength Modifier (also applies to damage).
Missile: Dexterity Modifier (not applied to damage).
Rear attacks: Negates AC bonuses from shields.
Missile range: Short: +1 Attack, Medium: no modifier,
Long: –1 Attack. Beyond Long range: attack not possible.
Missile cover: The Referee may apply Attack Roll penalties
of between –1 and –4 if a target is hiding behind partial
cover. For example, a small table might incur a –1 penalty,
dense woods might incur a –4 penalty. Targets behind full
cover cannot be hit.
Spacing
The Referee should judge the number of opponents that
can attack a single combatant, bearing in mind the combat-
ant’s size and the available space around them.
10′ wide corridors: Have sufficient space for at most 2–3
characters to fight side-by-side.
MAGIC
Spells, fairy glamours, fairy runes, magic items, and turn-
ing the undead all take effect in this phase in the initiative
sequence.
Restrictions
Line of sight: Unless noted otherwise, the intended target
(a specific creature, object, or area) must be visible to the
character.
Movement: Characters casting spells or using fairy runes
cannot move in the same Round.
Disrupting Spells and Runes
If a character casting a spell or using a rune is successfully
attacked or fails a Saving Throw before their side’s initia-
tive, the spell or rune is disrupted and fails. Spells fizzle out
with no effect and are erased from the caster’s memory.
Runes are treated as having been used.
MORALE
If a battle is going against them, combatants may decide
to retreat, flee, or surrender. Players always make this
decision for their characters, but the Referee may roll to
determine if monsters or NPCs break morale.
Morale Checks: Roll 2d6. If the result exceeds the combat-
ant’s Morale, their morale breaks and they try to surrender
or flee in the next Round. Otherwise they keep fighting.
One check per side: Typically a single Morale Check is
made for all members of a side, rather than one check per
individual.
When to check Morale: The first time a combatant on the
same side is killed, and when half of the side has been killed
or defeated. For a creature encountered alone, a Morale
Check should be made when it is first harmed and when it
is reduced to 1/4 or less Hit Points.
Two successes: If a combatant makes two successful
Morale Checks in an encounter, they will fight until killed,
with no further checks necessary.
Morale 12: Combatants with Morale 12 fight to the death,
never rolling a Morale Check.
Situational modifiers: The Referee may apply modifiers
(from –2 to +2) to combatants’ Morale.

=== PAGE 170 ===
168
P a r t S e v e n | a D v e n t u r i n g
Other Combat Matters
Optional extra combat rules covering more specialised situations.Optional extra combat rules covering more specialised situations.
T
he combat rules on p166 cover the most
common situations that occur when an encoun-
ter turns to violence. The rules presented here
provide guidelines for handling more unusual or special-
ised situations. All are optional and only used at the Refer-
ee’s discretion.
ATTACKING WITH TWO
WEAPONS
Characters with Dexterity or Strength as a Prime Ability
may choose to wield two one-handed melee weapons, gain-
ing the ability to make an extra attack each Round.
Primary weapon: Attack Rolls with the primary weapon
suffer a –2 penalty.
Secondary weapon: The secondary weapon must be of
Small size (e.g. a dagger or hand axe). The character may
make one extra attack per Round with the secondary
weapon, at a –4 penalty to Attack Rolls.
CHARGING INTO MELEE
Once per combat, a combatant may charge into melee and
attack, as follows.
Declaration: Charging must be declared before initiative
is rolled.
Charge: The combatant must move at least 20′ before
attacking. There must be a clear run.
Effects: The combatant gains a +2 Attack bonus this Round,
but their AC is penalised by –1 this Round.
Brace weapons: Weapons that may be braced against a
charge inflict double damage on the charging combatant—
see Armour and Weapons, p118.
DEATH’S DOOR
The standard rule is that a character reduced to 0 Hit Points
dies immediately. Groups wishing to reduce the risk of
death may rule that when a character is reduced to 0 Hit
Points, rather than being dead, they linger at death’s door.
Effects: A character at death’s door is unconscious and
will die without magical aid. Each Round, there is a 2-in-6
chance of the character dying.
Aid: Healing that takes effect instantaneously (e.g. Lesser
Healing, Spirithame, magic potions) saves a character if
applied before they perish, restoring them to 1 Hit Point.
Characters brought back from death’s door suffer a perma-
nent loss of 1 point from a random Ability Score.
FIGHTING IN WATER
Land-dwellers are at a disadvantage when fighting in or
beneath water—they are unaccustomed with moving and
attacking in water, and their weapons are often unsuited.
Penalties: Land-dwellers suffer a –2 penalty to Attack and
Damage Rolls when fighting underwater.
Melee weapons: Weapons designed to chop, slash, or
bludgeon (e.g. axes, swords, maces) are ineffective under-
water. Thrusting weapons (e.g. daggers, spears) function
normally.
Missile weapons: Ineffective underwater.
INVISIBLE OPPONENTS
Melee attacks: Melee Attack Rolls against an invisible
opponent suffer a –4 penalty.
Missile attacks: It is usually not possible to target an invis-
ible creature with missile attacks.
Defending: Invisible creatures gain a +4 bonus to Attack
Rolls against opponents that cannot perceive them.
MISSILE FIRE INTO MELEE
The constant and unpredictable movement of melee makes
firing or throwing missile weapons at melee combatants
an uncertain proposition.
Attack penalties: The Attack Roll is penalised by –1 for
each combatant in melee with the intended target (to a
maximum penalty of –4).
Natural 1s: Optionally, on a natural 1 Attack Roll, the
Referee may rule that the missile hits a randomly deter-
mined combatant in melee with the intended target,
inflicting damage.
NON-LETHAL ATTACKS
Any melee attack may be made with the intent to subdue
or restrain an opponent, rather than killing them.
Non-lethal damage: Handle Attack and Damage Rolls as
normal, but track non-lethal damage separately. If accrued
non-lethal damage equals or exceeds a combatant’s
current Hit Points, they are subdued or knocked uncon-
scious.
Blades: Bladed melee weapons can deal non-lethal blows
by attacking with the flat side, rather than the sharp edge.
This incurs a –2 Attack penalty and reduces damage by half.
Healing: Non-lethal damage heals at a rate of 1 point per
Level per hour. For example, a Level 4 character recovers
4 points of non-lethal damager each hour. Magical heal-
ing can also be used to heal non-lethal damage, with any
excess points restoring lost Hit Points as normal.

=== PAGE 171 ===
P a r t S e v e n | a D v e n t u r i n g
169
PARALYSED OPPONENTS
Helpless opponents, such as those magically paralysed or
frozen, can be automatically hit in melee without an Attack
Roll. Only a Damage Roll is required.
PARRYING
Instead of attacking (or performing another action) in a
Round, a combatant may opt to act solely defensively.
Declaration: Parrying must be declared before initiative
is rolled.
Armour Class bonus: The parrying combatant adds their
Strength Modifier or +1 (whichever is greater) to their AC
against all melee attacks that Round.
PUSHING
A combatant may attempt to push past an opponent (for
example, someone blocking a doorway) or to push them
back (for example, someone fighting close to a cliff edge).
Push attack: The attacker makes a melee Attack Roll with
a –4 penalty.
Effects: Instead of suffering damage on a successful attack,
the defender must Save Versus Hold. If the save fails, the
attacker may choose to move past the defender or to push
the defender 5′ back.
Opponent size: If the defender is significantly larger than
the attacker, the Referee may grant a +4 bonus to their
Saving Throw. If the size difference is extreme, a push
attack may simply be impossible.
SPLASH WEAPONS
Splash weapons—for example burning oil or holy water—
are containers that smash on contact, dousing the victim
in a dangerous liquid. (See Armour and Weapons, p118.)
Targeting a creature: A splash weapon may be thrown at a
single creature. This is handled as a normal missile attack
against the target’s Armour Class.
Targeting a surface: Alternatively, a splash weapon may be
thrown so that it smashes on a hard surface close to one or
more creatures. This is handled as a missile attack against
Armour Class 10. If the attack succeeds, all creatures within
5′ of the targeted surface are splashed with the liquid and,
if it is harmful to them, suffer one-quarter normal damage
(rounded up).
Misses
When a splash weapon misses its target (whether a crea-
ture or a surface), the Referee may determine the actual
location where it smashes.
Direction: Roll 1d12 to determine the direction, interpret-
ing the roll as a clock-face direction.
Distance: The container smashes 10′ from the intended
target in the specified direction.
Damage: Creatures within 5′ of this location are splashed
with the liquid. If it is harmful to them, they suffer
one-quarter normal damage (rounded up).
SWITCHING WEAPONS
Unless a combatant simply drops their current weapon on
the ground, switching weapons is treated as the combat-
ant’s action for the Round (i.e. instead of attacking).
UNARMED ATTACKS
Some monsters do not wield weapons, using their natural
unarmed attacks (claws, horns, bites, etc.) instead. Humans
and other characters may make unarmed melee attacks by
punching, kicking, and so on.
Damage: Unarmed attacks inflict 1d2 damage, plus the
character’s Strength Modifier.
UNSTABLE SURFACES
Combatants on an unstable surface, such as a ship in rough
waters or riding a flying animal, are affected as follows.
Note that magical means of flight (e.g. the Fly spell) gener-
ally do not count as unstable.
Missile attacks: Suffer a –4 Attack penalty.
Spells: Cannot be cast.
Magic items: Can be used normally.

=== PAGE 172 ===
170
P a r t S e v e n | a D v e n t u r i n g
Example of Combat
Demonstrating how the rules and procedures of combat work in play.Demonstrating how the rules and procedures of combat work in play.
E
mily (playing Grendl Lockehorn, a Level 3 breggle
knight), James (playing Samwise Lank, a Level
3 human friar), and Jeff (playing Boots Pounce-
mouse, a Level 3 grimalkin enchanter) have been accosted
in their campsite by a knight atop a strange mount. Once
again, Gavin as the Referee sets the scene.
Gavin: You catch the scent of freshly cut roses and hear
the padding of feet as a huge dormouse bounds out of the
forest in front of you. A tall, lithe figure with hair the colour
of the midnight sky and twinkling with stars sits astride
it—bareback, no less! He’s clad in plate armour that looks to
be crafted from living ivy. He wears no helmet and wields
a sword in his left hand. As his pupilless silver eyes fall
upon you, he cries out as if he were singing a song, “Stand
and deliver, ye knaves and interlopers. Ye stand before a
Knight of the Goblin Rhymers and must render unto me
that which is due my master!”
James (playing Samwise): I knew it! They have been track-
ing us.
Gavin: It looks like it, yeah. The knight leaps off his strange
mount with a flourish, clearly intent on battle. <Gavin
starts following the combat procedure—p166.> Before
we roll Initiative, does anyone have any actions to declare?
James: Yes I want to cast Mantle of Protection. One ques-
tion. I know it’s technically another person, but does the
protection extend to Rosemary since I’m carrying her?
Gavin: <Thinking for a second, since Rosemary has been
more of a story MacGuffin than an independent character>
Hmmm… yeah, sure. She’s small. It’ll protect her as well as
long as you keep holding her close.
James: Great.
Jeff (playing Boots): I want to use a glamour, but that
doesn’t count as casting a spell, right? It can’t be disrupted.
Gavin: That’s right, so you don’t need to declare it before
we roll Initiative. Anything else?
Emily: I want to lower my head and make a charge attack at
Sir Fancy Pants with my horns. I have to declare that, right?
Gavin: That’s right. Excellent, decisive action! OK let’s roll
Initiative then. <Gavin rolls a d6 for the enemy side—the
knight and the dormouse.> I got a 4.
Emily (playing Grendl): I’ll roll for us. Yes, 5! We go first.
Oh, it is on!
Gavin: Great, so movement first. You’re all standing about
20′ away from the knight and his steed. Grendl is charging.
Anyone else want to move this Round? <James and Jeff
shake their heads.> What’s your Speed Emily?
Emily: Speed 20. So I can get to the knight this Round.
<Double-checking the optional charging rule> Yep, and 20′
of movement is enough to do a charge attack. He’s not hold-
ing a brace weapon, so he can’t hit me with double damage.
Gavin: Good stuff. So you charge him, lowering your head
to get a good aim with your horns. As you’re charging,
you’ll get a +2 Attack bonus when we come to the melee
phase, and you suffer a –1 AC penalty this Round as you’re
rushing in recklessly. Next up would be missile attack, but
you both said you wanted to use magic, so let’s go straight
to your side’s magic phase.
James: Yep, so I cast Mantle of Protection as I said.
Jeff: And I want to use my Conjure Treats glamour to entice
the giant dormouse and prevent it from attacking us.
Hoping it’s a mortal animal and can be affected.
Gavin: Alright, so James you say your prayer to St Benester
and your protection spell takes effect. It lasts for 12 Turns,
so we’ll just cross off 1 Turn after the combat finishes. Jeff,
you gesture toward the giant dormouse and a wheel of
cheese appears in your hand!
Jeff (as Boots): “Mousy mousy, come and get it!”
Gavin: The giant dormouse looks imploringly between
your cheese and its master. I’ll make a Morale Roll to see
whether it goes for the tasty treat or stays loyal to the
knight. <Gavin is using the DMB giant rat stat block for the
dormouse, with double normal Hit Points and +1 Attack. He
rolls 2d6, scoring a 7—just under the dormouse’s Morale
score of 8. The beast remains loyal.> The dormouse licks
its lips but turns its attention towards Grendl charging its
master. Sorry Jeff, that was a great idea.
Jeff: Ah too bad. Makes sense though. Not everyone favours
fine cheese over mortal combat.
Gavin: Ha, right. So that was your side’s magic phase. Now
the moment everyone’s been waiting for—melee attacks!
Go for it Emily.
Emily: <Making an Attack Roll. She rolls a d20, adding +2
for being a Level 3 knight, +2 for charging, and +2 for her
Strength of 16, for a total of +6 to the roll.> An 18 total!
Gavin: <Checks the Armour Class of the elf knight stat
block in the DMB—AC 17.> The knight attempts to parry
the incoming horns, but is taken aback by the breggle’s
burst of aggression and you slam into his side. It’s a hit—
roll damage!
Emily: <Rolls 1d4+1 for the horn damage, adding +2 for her
Strength modifier> Nice, a total of 6 damage!

=== PAGE 173 ===
P a r t S e v e n | a D v e n t u r i n g
171
Gavin: <Updates the elf knight’s current HP—he has 15 HP
left.> He staggers back with an “oof” and cries out “Tooth-
tipper! Attack!” OK that’s your side’s actions wrapped up
for the Round. Now your enemies get to act. They’re both
going to attack Grendl as she’s the one who started the fight
and she’s right next to both of them. I’ll roll the knight’s
attack first. <Rolls a d20, adding +5 for the knight’s sword
attack, as listed in the DMB.> 14! What’s your AC Emily?
Emily: 16, plate mail with no Dexterity or shield bonus.
Oh minus 1 for having charged this Round, so 15. Still not
enough. Better luck next time!
Gavin: You deftly dodge the knight’s blow, only to find the
great fangs of the dormouse coming at you. <Rolls a d20,
adding +1.> Whoa, 18! That’s one vicious rodent. Toothtip-
per blindsides Grendl, biting her shoulder from the flank.
You take <Gavin rolls 1d3> 3 damage.
Emily: Just a scratch. <Updates Grendl’s current Hit Points
on her character sheet.> 16 HP left.
Gavin: Both sides have acted now, so it’s the next Round.
Any spells or retreats from melee to declare?
Emily: I’m staying put. Can either of you jump in and help
with this dormouse?
Jeff: Sure, I can try to stab Toothtipper while it’s distracted
trying to eat Grendl. I was thinking of firing at it with my
crossbow, but I don’t want to risk hitting Grendl.
James: Am I close enough to Grendl to cast a touch spell
on her?
Gavin: Not really. She’s a good 20′ away, and you can’t move
and cast a spell in the same Round.
James: Alright. Then I’ll get close enough that I can touch
her or Boots next Round, but still hold my staff across the
arm where I’m carrying the baby.
Gavin: Oh yeah. Rosemary bursts into tears and is loudly
wailing in your arms, Samwise. It doesn’t look like either
of your opponents is retreating, so let’s roll Initiative.
Jeff: I’ll roll this time. Nice, I got a 6!
Gavin: Well, I got a 1. You guys go first again. So Jeff you
wanted to move up to attack Toothtipper, and James you
wanted to move up to be in a position to cast a spell next
Round, right?
James: Yep, I’ll get just behind Grendl.
Jeff: Yep, I’m going for that big tasty mouse! Oh, I just
remembered, I heal if I eat a giant rodent.
Gavin: Alright so you’re both in position now. I don’t think
anyone wanted to do any missile attacks or magic, so let’s
go to the melee attacks phase. Make your Attack Rolls
Emily and Jeff.
Emily: If Jeff’s gonna deal with the vermin, I’m gonna
attack Sir Fancy Pants again. <Rolls d20 + 6.> Aw crap, 12, I
doubt that’s enough.
Gavin: Nope, the blow glances off his armour. It looks like
ivy, but protects like steel.
Jeff: OK here goes, against the dormouse. <Rolls d20,
adding +1 for being a Level 3 enchanter.> Also a 12.
Gavin: <Checking the DMB giant rat monster entry> That’s
a hit! Dormouse fur isn’t quite as tough as plate mail.
Jeff: Nice! That’s <rolls 1d6> 3 damage with my shortsword.
Gavin: <Updates the dormouse’s current HP—it has 2 HP
left.> You get a really good blow, slicing down its side. The
dormouse squeals in pain but keeps fighting. You think
another blow like that would kill it. OK I think everyone’s
gone now, right? So it’s the enemies’ turn to act now. Tooth-
tipper is going to continue gnawing on Grendl, while the
Knight of the Goblin Rhymers uses the distraction to move
past her and make an attack on Samwise in the hopes he’ll
drop the child.
Emily: Hey! Can’t I block him from moving around me?
Gavin: Well, strictly speaking he can move up to half
his Speed and remain in melee, so he’s not disengaging
exactly. Samwise is right behind you, so the knight only
has to manoeuvre 5 or 10 feet around you.
Emily: Fair enough. Maybe think twice about getting so
close to me in melee next time Samwise!
Gavin: I’ll roll Toothtipper’s attack on Grendl first. <Rolls a
d20, adding +1. He gets a total of 12, missing.> Toothtipper
suddenly realises there’s a large anthropomorphic fairy
cat right next to him and is more than a bit distracted. Its
teeth glance off the armour protecting your arm, Emily.
The knight moves to intercept Samwise, trying to slay him
with one quick thrust of his sword that appears crafted
from goblin teeth bound and sharpened to a razor’s edge.
<Rolls a d20, adding +5 as noted in the elf knight’s entry in
the DMB. He rolls an 18, for a total of 23!> Oof, what’s your
AC James?
James: Uh oh, only 12. Oh… is the knight Chaotic by any
chance? If so my Mantle of Protection gives me AC 13.
Gavin: Yep, he’s affected by the spell. But I rolled a 23, so
it’s still a hit. You jerk aside to avoid injury to the child,
Samwise, but the sword pierces your shoulder. Take <rolls
1d8+2> 8 damage.
James: <Updates Samwise’s current HP> Argh, I only have
10 Hit Points! I’ve got 2 HP left, but there’s no way he’s
getting this baby. I didn’t do anything after moving up.
Can I smack him with my staff? Remember, I had the tips
capped with cold iron, and he’s a fairy…
Emily: Oh, nice!
Gavin: I mean, technically, your side’s actions are over
for the Round, but since you didn’t take an action, then
sure, you can go at the end, after everyone else. Make an
Attack Roll.
James: <Picks up the d20> Here we go…
Will Samwise defeat the already wounded elf knight? Will
they escape with the baby Rosemary? Why did the Knight of
the Goblin Rhymers want her? Fate and free will are mired
in mystery when one wanders beneath the eaves of Dolmen-
wood...

=== PAGE 174 ===


=== PAGE 175 ===
Part Eight
Appendices
M
ortals are a strange lot. They act as though they
own both this world and whatever their religions
say comes in the hereafter. They refuse to take the
world as it is, always trying to bend it to their will, whether by
the sword or by some elusive claims of universal truth. It’s all
quite comical watching them chase their own tails in the name
of enlightenment. What fools these mortals be!”
—Twilight’s-Last-Dreaming, elf bard
“

=== PAGE 176 ===
174
P a r t e i g h t | a P P e n D i c e S
Dolmenwood Calendar
The reckoning by which the folk of Dolmenwood track the passing of time.The reckoning by which the folk of Dolmenwood track the passing of time.
A 
printable calendar PDF, designed for use by the
Referee in tracking events and the passage of
time in Dolmenwood campaigns, is available as
a free download from dolmenwood.com.
THE YEAR
The common reckoning of time in Dolmenwood divides
the year into 12 months of 7-day weeks and a total of 352
days. The lunar cycle is 291/3 days, yielding precisely 12 lunar
months per year.
Days of the week: Each week has 7 days, named as follows:
Colly, Chime, Hayme, Moot, Frisk, Eggfast, Sunning.
Wysendays: Some months have additional days—known
as Wysendays—with their own unique names. Wysendays
are not regarded as being part of a week.
Months: Each month contains 4 standard weeks, followed
by any Wysendays. The first day of the month is always
Colly. The Months of the Year table shows the months,
their place in the procession of the seasons, their lengths,
the names of their Wysendays, and the name given to the
moon that waxes and wanes within each.
FEAST DAYS
A multitude of local festivities are celebrated in obscure
hamlets and out-of-the-way villages of Dolmenwood, but
the following dates are observed throughout the region.
The Feast of Cats (2nd of Symswald): For reasons lost to
the vagaries of time, the people of Dolmenwood associate
cats with the first blossoms of spring. Thus, their spring
dances are accompanied by screeching fiddle tunes and
all are masked as cats.
The Feast of St Clewyd (25th of Reedwryme): The patron
saint of Dolmenwood, in whose honour unicorn-effigies
are burned atop bonfires and pheasants and partridges
baked into spiced pies.
Festival of the Green Man (30th of Reedwryme, Druden
Day): A relic of ancient worship in Dolmenwood. The Green
Man was at one time honoured as King of the Wood. In
modern times, that title is given to the Nag-Lord, who is
believed to have slain the Green Man and brought woe
to Dolmenwood. This festival pays memorial to the slain
king through the hanging of manikins of moss and wood
by their ankles in the branches around villages.
The Hunting of the Winter Hart (30th of Braghold,
Dolmenday): On this night, a white fairy stag of great
nobility and beauty rushes through Dolmenwood. Villag-
ers throughout the forest ride into the woods and return
at the twilight of dawn. If the Winter Hart is caught, it is
said that winter will be banished for a year.
MOON SIGNS
(OPTIONAL RULE)
Characters born in the mortal world (i.e. mortals and demi-
fey—excluding fairies such as elves and grimalkins) come
inevitably under the sway of the moon’s potent magical
influences.
Waxing, Full, and Waning Moon Signs
Each moon of the year has different effects during its
waxing phase (around 13 days), its full phase (around 3
days), and it waning phase (around 13 days). Therefore there
are 36 moon signs in the year.
Determining a Character’s Moon Sign
Optionally, during character creation, roll on the Moon
Signs table. The result indicates the moon and phase under
which the character was born, along with the associated
influence. Unless noted otherwise, the effects of a charac-
ter’s moon sign are permanent and unalterable.
MONTHS OF THE YEAR
# Month Season Days Wysendays Moon
1 Grimvold The onset of winter 30 Hanglemas, Dyboll’s Day Grinning moon
2 Lymewald Deep winter 28 – Dead moon
3 Haggryme The fading of winter 30 Yarl’s Day, The Day of Virgins Beast moon
4 Symswald The onset of spring 29 Hopfast Squamous moon
5 Harchment High spring 29 Smithing Knight’s moon
6 Iggwyld The fading of spring 30 Shortening, Longshank’s Day Rotting moon
7 Chysting The onset of summer 31 Bradging, Copsewallow, Chalice Maiden’s moon
8 Lillipythe High summer 29 Old Dobey’s Day Witch’s moon
9 Haelhold The fading of summer 28 – Robber’s moon
10 Reedwryme The onset of autumn 30 Shub’s Eve, Druden Day Goat moon
11 Obthryme Deep autumn 28 – Narrow moon
12 Braghold The fading of autumn 30 The Day of Doors, Dolmenday Black moon

=== PAGE 177 ===
P a r t e i g h t | a P P e n D i c e S
175
MOON SIGNS
d100 Moon Effect
01–03 Grinning (W) 50% chance of guardian undead ignoring the character’s presence. (Though they act normally if provoked.)
04 Grinning (F) +1 bonus to Saving Throws against the powers of undead monsters.
05–07 Grinning (w) +1 Attack bonus against undead monsters.
08–10 Dead (W) +1 bonus to Attack and Damage Rolls the Round after killing a foe.
11 Dead (F) If killed by non-magical means, the character returns to life after 1 Turn with 1 Hit Point. Their Consti-
tution and Wisdom are permanently halved (to a minimum score of 3). This supernatural avoidance of
death only takes effect once ever.
12–14 Dead (w) Undead monsters attack all others in the party before attacking the character.
15–17 Beast (W) +2 bonus to Charisma (maximum 18) when interacting with dogs and horses.
18 Beast (F) Wild animals attack all others in the party before attacking the character.
19–21 Beast (w) +1 Attack bonus against wolves and bears.
22–24 Squamous (W) Effects of poison are delayed by 1 Turn.
25 Squamous (F) +2 bonus to Saving Throws against the breath attacks and magical powers of wyrms and dragons.
26–29 Squamous (w) +1 Attack bonus against serpents and wyrms.
30–33 Knight’s (W) +2 bonus to Charisma (maximum 18) when interacting with nobles.
34 Knight’s (F) +1 AC bonus against attacks with metal weapons.
35–38 Knight’s (w) On a tied Initiative roll when in melee with knights or soldiers, the character acts first, as if they had won.
39–42 Rotting (W) +2 bonus to Charisma (maximum 18) when interacting with sentient fungi.
43 Rotting (F) +2 AC bonus against attacks by fungal monsters.
44–47 Rotting (w) In the character’s presence, fungal monsters suffer a –1 penalty to Attack and Damage Rolls.
48–51 Maiden’s (W) +2 bonus to Charisma (maximum 18) when interacting with demi-fey.
52 Maiden’s (F) +2 bonus to Saving Throws against charms and glamours.
53–56 Maiden’s (w) +1 bonus to Attack and Damage Rolls against shape-changers and those cloaked with illusions.
57–60 Witch’s (W) When the character receives magical healing, they gain 1 additional Hit Point. This applies at most once
per day to each type of magical healing (e.g. specific spell, Class trait, potion, etc.).
61 Witch’s (F) +1 bonus to Saving Throws against holy magic.
62–65 Witch’s (w) +1 bonus to Attack Rolls against witches and holy spell casters.
66–69 Robber’s (W) +2 bonus to Charisma (maximum 18) when interacting with Chaotic mortals.
70 Robber’s (F) +1 AC bonus against attacks by Chaotic mortals, fairies, or demi-fey.
71–74 Robber’s (w) +1 Attack bonus against Chaotic mortals, fairies, and demi-fey.
75–78 Goat (W) +2 bonus to Charisma (maximum 18) when interacting with breggles (including crookhorns).
79 Goat (F) Breggles (including crookhorns) attack all others in the party before attacking the character.
80–83 Goat (w) +1 Attack bonus against breggles (including crookhorns).
84–87 Narrow (W) +2 bonus to Charisma (maximum 18) when interacting with fairies, but suffer a –1 penalty to all Saving
Throws against fairy magic.
88 Narrow (F) If the character is afflicted by a curse or a Geas spell, there is a 1-in-4 chance of the caster also being
affected by their own magic.
89–92 Narrow (w) +1 Attack bonus against fairies and demi-fey.
93–96 Black (W) +1 bonus to Search Checks to find secret doors.
97 Black (F) +2 bonus to AC and Saving Throws when surprised.
98–00 Black (w) +2 bonus to Saving Throws versus illusions and glamours.
(W): Waxing moon. (F): Full moon. (w): Waning moon.

=== PAGE 178 ===
176
P a r t e i g h t | a P P e n D i c e S
HOUSE BRACKENWOLD
Alignment: Lawful.
Domain: The Duchy of Brackenwold, encompassing the whole of Dolmenwood (at
least notionally) as well as a large region to the south. The domains of all other listed
noble houses fall within the duchy.
Seat: Castle Brackenwold, upon the south-eastern verge of Dolmenwood.
Head: Duke Thespian III of Brackenwold. A troubled man who, it is said, would prefer
to spend his days hunting rather than presiding over a great realm. It is known that
the duke harbours a deep hatred of the Drune and a growing fear of the Nag-Lord.
Noble Houses of
Dolmenwood
The nine noble families that hold dominion over Dolmenwood.The nine noble families that hold dominion over Dolmenwood.
HOUSE GUILLEFER
Alignment: Neutral.
Domain: A region of forest on either side of the Lochsbreth Road, in north-eastern
Dolmenwood, encompassing the villages of Blackeswell, Meagre’s Reach, and Odd.
Seat: The Hall of Sleep, located at the north-eastern end of the Groaning Loch.
Head: The nobles of this house share rulership on a sporadically rotating basis.
The current ruler, Edwin Guillefer, is a poet and harpist, and is said to be a friend of
Ygraine the sorceress. He remains untroubled by the waxing of the Nag-Lord’s influ-
ence in the region, to the consternation of his neighbour, the Lady Harrowmoor.
HOUSE HARROWMOOR
Alignment: Lawful.
Domain: A broad region of forest at the heart of Dolmenwood, stretching from the
town of Prigwort in the east to the shores of Lake Longmere in the west.
Seat: Harrowmoor Keep, located on the southerly cliffs of the Groaning Loch.
Head: Lady Theatrice Harrowmoor. A famed intellect and expert on matters histor-
ical, Lady Harrowmoor is cool-headed but not cold-hearted. Of late, she has taken
more direct involvement in the affairs of Prigwort, bolstering the town guard
against the growing presence of crookhorn ruffians in the area.
HOUSE HOGWARSH
Alignment: Neutral.
Domain: The Barony of the High Wold, encompassing the long-settled south-west-
ern corner of Dolmenwood and the rustic pastures to the south. The domains of
houses Malbleat, Murkin, Nodlock, and Ramius fall within the barony.
Seat: High-Hankle, located in the central plains of the High Wold, in the south-east
of Dolmenwood.
Head: Baron Sagewine Hogwarsh. Inherited the lordship of the High Wold as a
callow youth. Now in his thirties, Hogwarsh is known for his lax attitude to the law,
being more interested in wine and debauchery than in the maintenance of order.

=== PAGE 179 ===
P a r t e i g h t | a P P e n D i c e S
177
HOUSE MALBLEAT
Alignment: Chaotic.
Domain: The eastern portion of the High Wold region in the south-east of Dolmen-
wood, encompassing the towns of Lankshorn and Dreg.
Seat: Redwraith Manor, located in the woods four miles north of Lankshorn.
Head: Lord Gryphius Malbleat, longhorn breggle. A refined aesthete known for his
cruelty and his bitter enmity toward his elder half-brother, Lord Ramius.
HOUSE MULBRECK
Alignment: Lawful.
Domain: The woods and meadows of southern Dolmenwood, east of the River
Hameth, encompassing the Woodcutters’ Encampment.
Seat: Bogwitt Manor, located in the south-eastern corner of Dolmenwood.
Head: Lady Pulsephine Mulbreck. A reclusive lady who seldom sets foot outside of
her manor and permits no guests to enter. It is said that she remains in mourning
over the death of her husband a decade past.
HOUSE MURKIN
Alignment: Chaotic.
Domain: The rugged, little-travelled lands west of Dolmenwood, within the Barony
of the High Wold, bounded by the marshes of the Northern Scratch.
Seat: Kolstoke Keep, located on the western edge of Dolmenwood.
Head: Lord Simeone Murkin, a boorish and cruel-tempered man of mixed breggle/
human parentage. Murkin’s only passions are conquest and military dominance.
HOUSE NODLOCK
Alignment: Neutral.
Domain: A small pocket of pasture and woodland at the far south-western tip of
Dolmenwood, within the Barony of the High Wold.
Seat: Nodding Castle, located on the south-western edge of Dolmenwood.
Head: Lord Harald Nodlock. A slovenly man renowned for his love of wine (at all
hours of the day), his volatile mood, and his proclivity for spontaneously meting
out justice. Nodlock is said to be a lackey of his neighbour, Lord Ramius.
HOUSE RAMIUS
Alignment: Neutral.
Domain: The western deeps of Dolmenwood and a small portion of the grasslands
upon its south-western verge, within the Barony of the High Wold.
Seat: Castle Everdusk, located two miles into the woods in the High Wold region in
the south-east of Dolmenwood.
Head: Lord Shadgore Ramius, longhorn breggle. A brilliant mind, known for his
subtle strategies and far-reaching ambition. Resents the meddling Baron Hogwarsh
for granting his younger half-brother, Lord Malbleat, dominion over much of the
High Wold.

=== PAGE 180 ===
178
P a r t e i g h t | a P P e n D i c e S
Religion in Dolmenwood
The faiths and spiritual practices of the mortal folk of Dolmenwood.The faiths and spiritual practices of the mortal folk of Dolmenwood.
R
eligious practices play a daily role in the lives of
many among the mortal Kindreds of Dolmen-
wood. An overview of the religious beliefs of
humans, breggles, and mosslings is presented here.
PLURITINE CHURCH
The dominant religion in Dolmenwood, sanctioned as
the official religion of the Duchy of Brackenwold. Most
humans in Dolmenwood are adherents of the Church, to
one degree or another.
Deities: A nameless, male god, only referred to by the
epithet “the One True God.” God’s true name is regarded as
ineffable. Daily practice focuses on venerating the host of
saints—exalted people who performed mighty and mirac-
ulous deeds in the service of the Church, now said to act as
intermediaries between mortals and God.
Origin: The Pluritine Church originated 1,600 years ago, in
a land far from Dolmenwood, when the five prophets (Ogri-
mund, Hogrish, Elidine, Lacrimyde, and These) received a
vision of the cosmos and the struggle of all living beings.
The prophets travelled the world to spread word of their
vision—that the gods of all religions are falsely named
aspects of One True God, who should not be named or
depicted. After 17 years of proselytising, the prophets
ascended to heaven without knowing mortal death.
Cosmology: The Church teaches that God created the
mortal world, the paradisical realm of heaven, and the
accursed realm of hell. He populated the mortal world with
humans, other mortal Kindreds, and animals. He created
angels to serve Him in heaven and devils to torment the
damned in hell. Lastly, God created the world of Fairy to
demonstrate the folly of life without faith and salvation.
Tenets: Depiction or naming of God is heresy. Sentient
life is sacred and must be protected and nurtured. Evil
deeds are to be punished, but free will is fundamental. Each
individual must be free to choose a life of evil (and eternal
damnation in hell) or good (and eternal reward in heaven).
Practices: Daily prayer to a patron saint. Weekly visits to
church for communal prayer (traditionally on Sunning).
Pilgrimage to cathedrals or holy sites.
Holy symbols: A circle with five rays descending from it,
representing God and the five prophets. This symbol is
known as the Chapes. Symbols of the three clerical orders
(p61) and effigies of individual saints are also common.
Holy texts: The most holy text—known as the Pragma-
phon—recounts the visions, lives, and apocalyptic proph-
ecies of the five prophets. Lesser bodies of text also exist
around most of the saints, recounting their deeds and
teachings.
Membership: The Church has a strict hierarchy of priest-
hood—see Pluritine Church Hierarchy. Clerics and friars
serve the Church in wild and dangerous lands.
Relationships: While all Kindreds are welcomed into the
faith, most adherents and officials are humans. The Pluri-
tine Church, prevalent in many human domains beyond
Dolmenwood, is a monotheistic, evangelistic religion that
seeks to convert all to its faith. While usually undertaken
with compassion, this urge to convert others has histor-
ically led to conflict (sometimes bloody) with other reli-
gions and nations. This, in turn, has led to the persecution
of adherents of the Pluritine Church in certain lands.
Pluritine Church Hierarchy
The major hierarchical ranks within the Church are
as follows, along with the Levels of PC clerics/friars
regarded as being of roughly equivalent rank.
Archbishop: Per land.
Bishop: Per major region of each land.
Commander: Three (one per Holy Order) under each
bishop. Level 10+ PCs.
Abbot / Archdeacon: Per abbey or city. Level 6+ PCs.
Vicar: Per settlement. Level 3+ PCs.
Curate: Several serve each vicar. Level 1+ PCs.
Pluritine Church holy symbol Gwyrae holy symbol Aud frengd Hlerr holy symbol Mogba holy symbol

=== PAGE 181 ===
P a r t e i g h t | a P P e n D i c e S
179
GWYRAE
The old religion of the human folk of Dolmenwood, before
the arrival of the Pluritine Church (around 1,200 years
ago) largely swept it away. Gwyrae is an Old Woldish word
meaning “sacred glade.”
Deities: A pantheon consisting of dozens of deities—called
Wood Gods—of greater or lesser importance. They are
regarded as manifestations of the spirit of Dolmenwood.
In modern times, the Green Man—god of feast, ale, revelry,
and hunting—is the only Wood God that remains promi-
nent in folkloric memory.
Origin: Lost to time.
Cosmology: Remnants of Gwyrae mythology can be found
in local folk belief in Dolmenwood. For example, locals still
speak of a “world tree” on which all known realms of exist-
ence are placed, with Fairy as the tree’s root. Belief in rein-
carnation into plants or animals also lingers in folklore.
Tenets: Lost to time.
Practices: A number of folk practices in Dolmenwood can
perhaps be traced back to Gwyrae: for example, the belief
in a state of merry inebriation as a means of communion
with greater powers.
Holy symbols: The symbol of the Green Man—a cruci-
form oak—can still be spied carved on old buildings or in
graveyards that were appropriated by the Pluritine Church.
In ancient times, adherents would wear cruciform or
Y-shaped pendants of oak wood or root, but such symbols
are seldom seen in the present day.
Holy texts: None known.
Membership: It is said that the witches of Dolmenwood
still worship the old gods in secret.
Relationships: The Pluritine Church suppresses any
remnants of Gwyrae. Otherwise, as a virtually dead reli-
gion, it has little contact with other faiths or folk.
AUD FRENGD HLERR
The system of ancestor worship practiced among breggles.
The name roughly translates as “praising the ancestors.”
Deities: None. A multitude of ancestors are venerated,
ranging from personal family members to great heroes
of myth. The semi-mythical ancestor Hraigl is commonly
revered, as mother of the longhorn noble houses.
Origin: The practice of revering ancestors originates in
the Passions of Ghrygaile—the tale of an ancient breggle
warrior-chieftain who attributed his glory in battle to the
aid of his ancestors, who fought by his side.
Cosmology: Aud frengd Hlerr teaches that the world (this
includes Fairy) is a testing ground. Individuals who prosper
and honour their families gather in an afterlife of eternal
feasting, along with their ancestors. Those who lead craven
or spiritless lives enter a dismal realm of torment where
their souls are annihilated by gnawing worms.
Tenets: Honouring and furthering the position of ones
family is utmost. Personal misdeeds can be redeemed by
sufficient propitiation of the ancestors.
Practices: Daily prayer to ancestors. Occasional sacrifices
of valuables to ancestors. Pilgrimages to the graves of
venerated ancestors.
Holy symbols: A ring of horns, often those of honoured
ancestors.
Holy texts: The Hlerrllaindr—a set of books recounting
the deeds of the most esteemed breggles.
Membership: Most breggles practice Aud frengd Hlerr.
There is no formal priesthood.
Relationships: Breggles regard Aud frengd Hlerr as a
philosophy of living, rather than a religion per se. It is not
contradictory to also follow another religion, for example
the Pluritine Church. The cosmology of Aud frengd Hlerr
is broadly compatible with that of the Church.
MOGBA
The traditional religious practices of the mosslings of
Dolmenwood, called Mogba in their own language (mean-
ing something like “holy decay”).
Deities: A multitude of deities of the deep forest and fecund
underworld, too numerous to list in full. Each settlement
has its own local deity, and many homes have their own
god of the cauldron, trough, or compost heap. All are
regarded as inhabiting the mortal world as divine siblings,
part of a pantheon. Some of the most widely known deities
are Mbombre (the clay god), Blosquom (fungal god of the
village of Orbswallow), and Splobgra (the worm god).
Origin: Mogba goes back to the unrecorded mists of time
in Dolmenwood. Mossling mythology does not speak of a
founder of the religion.
Cosmology: Visions sent by the Mogba deities reveal
that the world sits atop a cosmic puffball on the back of a
toad named Hwogra. At the end of time, the puffball will
explode, releasing the spores of the next cosmic cycle.
Tenets: The cycles of nature are sacrosanct, especially
those around ageing, death, and decay into the soil. Indi-
viduals are but temporary manifestations of the whims of
the soil. The unfathomable mystery of life is to be savoured.
Practices: Psychedelic communion with the Mogba deities.
Questing to consult with mould oracles. Fertilising sacred
plants with the compost of beloved ancestors.
Holy symbols: A toadstool with one or more eyes.
Holy texts: The evolving body of myths and legends known
as Hwogm is primarily passed down orally, but the mould
oracles do maintain written copies of various vintages.
Membership: Mould oracles act as hermit-priests and
spiritual guides. Otherwise, there is no formal religious
structure.
Relationships: Mogba is virtually unknown to other
Kindreds and the religion has nothing to say on the subject
of the religions of other folk.
Cults of the Nag-Lord
According to rumour, cults venerating the wicked
Nag-Lord have begun to spring up in the wild places of
Dolmenwood. It is said that crookhorns, monsters, and
even corrupted humans gather to worship the twisted
King of the Wood and further his evil plans.

=== PAGE 182 ===
180
P a r t e i g h t | a P P e n D i c e S
Breggle Kindred-Class
Goat-headed folk whose horn length indicates their social standing.Goat-headed folk whose horn length indicates their social standing.
Prime Abilities Intelligence and Strength
Hit Points 1d6 per Level, +2 after Level 10
Combat Aptitude Martial
Armour Any, including shields
Weapons Any
Native Languages Woldish, Gaffe, Caprice
B
reggle adventurers are capable combatants, wield-
ing both weapons of steel and their natural horns
with precision. At higher Levels, they also gain
magical aptitude, including the ability to cast arcane spells.
Starting Equipment
Armour (roll 1d6): 1. Leather armour. 2. Leather armour +
shield. 3. Chainmail. 4. Chainmail + shield. 5. Plate mail. 6.
Plate mail + shield.
Weapons (roll 1d6 twice): 1. Dagger. 2. Longsword. 3. Mace.
4. Shortbow + 20 arrows. 5. Shortsword. 6. Spear.
ARCANE MAGIC
Upon attaining longhorn status (from Level 4), breggles
begin to study arcane magic. See Arcane Magic, p78 for
full details on arcane magic, including learning spells, spell
memorisation, and the list of spells that breggles can learn.
Spell casting: The Breggle Spells Per Day table shows the
number of spells a breggle may memorise, determined by
the character’s Level. For example, a Level 6 breggle may
memorise at most two Rank 1 spells and one Rank 2 spell.
Learning spells: A longhorn does not automatically know
any spells and must learn spells from a mentor, from
discovered spell books, or by research.
Using magic items: Breggles of Level 4 or higher can use
magic items that may only be used by arcane spell-casters
(for example, magic scrolls of arcane spells).
BREGGLE SPELLS PER DAY
Spell Rank
Level 1 2 3 4 5
1 – – – – –
2 – – – – –
3 – – – – –
4 1 – – – –
5 2 – – – –
6 2 1 – – –
7 2 2 – – –
8 2 2 1 – –
9 3 2 2 – –
10 3 2 2 1 –
11 3 3 2 2 –
12 3 3 2 2 1
13 4 3 3 2 2
14 4 3 3 2 2
15 4 4 3 3 2
Playing a Kindred-Class
Some players prefer the option of a simple archetype
for non-human Kindreds, for example playing a breg-
gle as opposed to a breggle bard or a breggle knight. If
this option is preferred, the player should ignore the
Kindred traits presented on p32. The character only
has the traits listed here.

=== PAGE 183 ===
P a r t e i g h t | a P P e n D i c e S
181
BREGGLE ADVANCEMENT
Save Targets
Level XP Hit Points Attack Gaze Doom Ray Hold Blast Spell
1 0 1d6 +1 – 12 13 14 15 16
2 2,000 +1d6 +1 – 12 13 14 15 16
3 4,000 +1d6 +2 – 11 12 13 14 15
4 8,000 +1d6 +3 1 / day 10 11 12 13 14
5 16,000 +1d6 +3 1 / day 10 11 12 13 14
6 32,000 +1d6 +4 2 / day 9 10 11 12 13
7 64,000 +1d6 +5 2 / day 8 9 10 11 12
8 128,000 +1d6 +5 3 / day 8 9 10 11 12
9 260,000 +1d6 +6 3 / day 7 8 9 10 11
10 380,000 +1d6 +7 4 / day 6 7 8 9 10
11 500,000 +2 +7 4 / day 6 7 8 9 10
12 620,000 +2 +8 4 / day 5 6 7 8 9
13 740,000 +2 +9 5 / day 4 5 6 7 8
14 860,000 +2 +9 5 / day 4 5 6 7 8
15 980,000 +2 +10 5 / day 3 4 5 6 7
FUR
A breggle character’s thick, woolly fur grants them +1 AC
when unarmoured or wearing Light armour.
GAZE
Upon attaining longhorn status (from Level 4), a breggle
character can use their gaze to charm humans and short-
horns into obeisance.
Activating: The longhorn must gaze intently at an individ-
ual human or shorthorn.
Effect: If the target fails a Save Versus Spell, they are
charmed to view the longhorn character with awe and
respect. While charmed, the target is unable to harm the
longhorn, either directly or indirectly.
Duration: Until sunrise the following day.
Resisting: The holy spell Mantle of Protection counters a
longhorn’s gaze.
Usage frequency: A longhorn may use their gaze a limited
number of times per day, depending on their Level—see
the Breggle Advancement table. The gaze may be used on
a specific subject at most once a day.
HORNS
Breggles may make a melee attack with their horns instead
of a weapon. The damage inflicted increases with Level, as
indicated in the Breggle Horns table.
Horn Length and Social Standing
A breggle character begins play as a commoner of the
shorthorn caste aspiring to improve their lot in life. As
they advance in Level, gaining experience, wealth, and
renown, their horns grow (see the Breggle Horns table).
Longhorn Status
Upon reaching Level 4, a breggle character’s horns have
grown to the point that the character is recognised as a
longhorn.
BREGGLE HORNS
Level Length Damage
1 1″ 1d4
2 2″ 1d4
3 3″ 1d4 + 1
4 4″ 1d4 + 1
5 6″ 1d4 + 1
6 8″ 1d6
7 10″ 1d6
8 12″ 1d6
9 14″ 1d6 + 1
10+ 16″ 1d6 + 2

=== PAGE 184 ===
182
P a r t e i g h t | a P P e n D i c e S
Elf Kindred-Class
Ageless fairies who have crossed into the mortal world for reasons they seldom reveal.Ageless fairies who have crossed into the mortal world for reasons they seldom reveal.
Prime Abilities Charisma and Strength
Hit Points 1d6 per Level, +1 after Level 10
Combat Aptitude Martial
Armour Any, including shields
Weapons Any
Native Languages Woldish, Sylvan, High Elfish
E
lves are powerful warriors who, as natives of Fairy,
are blessed with innate talents mortals regard as
magical. They also have a knack for the sorcerous,
being able to use scrolls and other arcane magic items and
possessing secret runes granted to them by the lords of
Fairy.
Starting Equipment
Armour (roll 1d6): 1. Leather armour. 2. Leather armour +
shield. 3. Chainmail. 4. Chainmail + shield. 5. Plate mail. 6.
Plate mail + shield.
Weapons (roll 1d6 twice): 1. Dagger. 2–3. Longsword. 4–5.
Shortbow + 20 arrows. 6. Shortsword.
ELF SKILLS
Elves have a Skill Target of 5 for Listen and Search. They also
have one additional, specialised skill. The Elf Skill Targets
table lists the character’s Skill Targets as they advance in
level.
Detect Magic
An elf can attempt to detect the subtle resonances that are
woven into an enchanted object, place, or creature. If the
attempt succeeds, the elf knows if the object, place, or crea-
ture being focussed on is magical—i.e. enchanted, affected
by a spell, or possessed of innate magic of some kind.
Requirements: The elf must touch the object, place, or
creature to be analysed and must be able to concentrate
without distraction.
Time: Each attempt to detect magic requires 1 Turn.
Retrying: The elf may retry failed attempts as often as they
wish, each attempt requiring an additional 1 Turn.
Referee rolls: The Referee rolls all Detect Magic Checks,
so that players do not know if the roll failed or if there is
no magic present.
Downtime: Given an hour of solitude in a safe location,
an elf can automatically detect magic on an object, place,
or creature.
ELF SKILL TARGETS
Level Detect Magic Level Detect Magic
1 5 6 4
2 5 7 3
3 5 8 3
4 5 9 2
5 4 10+ 2
FAIRY RUNES
Elves are granted the use of fairy runes—the secret, magi-
cal sigils guarded by the rulers of Fairy. As a character
advances, fairy nobles may be drawn by the elf’s great
deeds and grant new runes. See Fairy Magic, p92 for
details on the fairy runes.
At Level 1: An elf knows one randomly selected rune of
lesser magnitude.
Subsequent Levels: Each time the character gains a Level,
the player should roll for the chance of acquiring a new
rune. See Learning Runes, p92.
Playing a Kindred-Class
Some players prefer the option of a simple archetype
for non-human Kindreds, for example playing an elf as
opposed to an elf enchanter or an elf thief. If this option
is preferred, the player should ignore the Kindred traits
presented on p36. The character only has the traits
listed here.

=== PAGE 185 ===
P a r t e i g h t | a P P e n D i c e S
183
GLAMOURS
Elves possess minor magical talents known as glamours
(see p94). The number of glamours known is deter-
mined by the character’s level as shown in the Elf Advance-
ment table. Known glamours are determined randomly.
IMMORTALITY
Elves can be killed but do not die naturally. They are
immune to diseases of non-magical origin. Elves also
cannot die of thirst or starvation, though a lack of suste-
nance drives them desperate and sadistic (see p153).
MAGIC ITEMS
Elves have a natural affinity for the arcane and are able to
use magic items that may only be used by arcane spell-cast-
ers (for example, magic scrolls of arcane spells).
RESISTANCE TO DIVINE AID
The saints of the Pluritine Church are loath to aid those
allied with the godless world of Fairy. If an elf is the subject
of a beneficial holy spell, there is a 2-in-6 chance of it having
no effect.
UNEARTHLY BEAUTY
Elves—both benevolent and wicked—are beautiful by
mortal standards. When interacting with mortals, an elf
gains a +2 bonus to Charisma (to a maximum of 18).
VULNERABLE TO COLD IRON
As fairies, cold iron weapons inflict +1 damage on elves.
(e.g. a cold iron shortsword would inflict 1d6+1 damage on
an elf, rather than the standard 1d6).
ELF ADVANCEMENT
Save Targets
Level XP Hit Points Attack Glamours Doom Ray Hold Blast Spell
1 0 1d6 +1 1 11 12 13 16 14
2 3,500 +1d6 +1 2 11 12 13 16 14
3 7,000 +1d6 +2 3 10 11 12 15 13
4 14,000 +1d6 +3 3 9 10 11 14 12
5 28,000 +1d6 +3 4 9 10 11 14 12
6 56,000 +1d6 +4 5 8 9 10 13 11
7 112,000 +1d6 +5 6 7 8 9 12 10
8 224,000 +1d6 +5 6 7 8 9 12 10
9 450,000 +1d6 +6 7 6 7 8 11 9
10 620,000 +1d6 +7 7 5 6 7 10 8
11 790,000 +1 +7 8 5 6 7 10 8
12 960,000 +1 +8 8 4 5 6 9 7
13 1,130,000 +1 +9 9 3 4 5 8 6
14 1,300,000 +1 +9 9 3 4 5 8 6
15 1,470,000 +1 +10 10 2 3 4 7 5

=== PAGE 186 ===
184
P a r t e i g h t | a P P e n D i c e S
Grimalkin Kindred-Class
Mercurial feline fairies who shift between three different forms.Mercurial feline fairies who shift between three different forms.
Prime Abilities Dexterity
Hit Points 1d6 per Level, +1 after Level 10
Combat Aptitude Semi-martial
Armour Any, including shields
Weapons Small and Medium
Native Languages Woldish, Mewl
G
rimalkin adventurers are capable warriors, often
underestimated due to their small size. They also
have a number of innate talents which mortals
regard as magical, including the powers of shape-shifting
for which they are renowned. A grimalkin’s normal form—
known as their estray form—is that of a humanoid cat,
wearing clothing, speaking, and walking upright.
Starting Equipment
Armour (roll 1d6): 1. Leather armour. 2. Leather armour +
shield. 3. Chainmail. 4. Chainmail + shield. 5. Plate mail. 6.
Plate mail + shield.
Weapons (roll 1d6 twice): 1. Club. 2. 3 daggers. 3. Sling + 20
stones. 4. Shortbow + 20 arrows. 5–6. Shortsword.
ARMOUR TAILORING
Armour must be tailored to grimalkins’ small size (see
Tailoring Armour, p119).
DEFENSIVE BONUS
In melee with Large creatures, grimalkins gain a +2 Armour
Class bonus, due to their small size.
EATING GIANT RODENTS
After spending 1 Turn devouring a freshly killed giant
rodent, a grimalkin heals 1 Hit Point.
Fur Balls (Thrice a Day)
During the day after eating a giant rodent, a grimalkin
may sacrifice 1 Hit Point to spew up a violent stream of
congealed fur, spittle, and bone. All creatures in a 30′ line
suffer 1d6 damage (Save Versus Blast for half).
GLAMOURS
Grimalkins possess minor magical talents known as glam-
ours (see p94). The number of glamours known is deter-
mined by the character’s level as shown in the Grimalkin
Advancement table. Known glamours are determined
randomly.
GRIMALKIN SKILLS
Grimalkins have a Skill Target of 5 for Listen. They also
have one additional, specialised skill. The Grimalkin Skill
Targets table lists the character’s Skill Targets as they
advance in Level.
Pick Lock
A successful check allows a grimalkin to open a lock with-
out the key. Thieves’ tools are required for picking locks
(see Adventuring Gear, p116).
Time: Each attempt to pick a lock requires 1 Turn.
Retrying: The grimalkin may retry failed attempts as often
as they wish, each attempt requiring an additional 1 Turn.
Difficult locks: The Referee may rule that certain locks
are more difficult. These may incur a penalty to the Pick
Lock Check or only allow a fixed number of attempts, after
which the grimalkin is stymied and can only try to pick the
lock again after gaining a Level.
GRIMALKIN SKILL TARGETS
Level Pick Lock Level Pick Lock
1 6 6 4
2 6 7 3
3 5 8 3
4 5 9 2
5 4 10+ 2
IMMORTALITY
Grimalkins can be killed but do not die naturally. They are
immune to diseases of non-magical origin. Grimalkins
also cannot die of thirst or starvation, though a lack of
sustenance drives them desperate and sadistic (see p153).
Playing a Kindred-Class
Some players prefer the option of a simple archetype for
non-human Kindreds, for example playing a grimalkin
as opposed to a grimalkin bard or a grimalkin hunter.
If this option is preferred, the player should ignore the
Kindred traits presented on p40. The character only
has the traits listed here.

=== PAGE 187 ===
P a r t e i g h t | a P P e n D i c e S
185
SHAPE-SHIFTING
A grimalkin can spend 1 Round to transform into either
a fat domestic cat (chester) or a primal fey form (wilder).
Capabilities: When transformed, a grimalkin cannot wield
weapons, pick locks, or use glamours.
Equipment: All gear carried is optionally transformed with
the character, reappearing when they return to humanoid
form.
Chester (Unlimited Usage)
Combat: The character has Armour Class 12, Speed 30, and
may make a bite and two claw attacks each Round. Each
attack inflicts 1 point of damage.
Speech: The character can understand language, but can
only respond in wordless yowls and meows.
Changing back: Takes 1 Round. Only possible when the
grimalkin is unobserved by any other sentient being.
Wilder (Once a Day)
Entering wilder: A grimalkin may only transform into
wilder when in melee and at less than half of their maxi-
mum Hit Points. On entering wilder, the character heals
2d6 Hit Points.
Near-invisible: Only the grimalkin’s deranged eyes are
visible. Opponents who cannot see the invisible suffer a –2
penalty to Attack Rolls against the grimalkin. Those who
can see the invisible discern a bulky feline form, 3′ high,
with a leering grin and fur standing electrified on end.
Combat: The character has Armour Class 13, Speed 30, and
may make a bite and two claw attacks each Round, with a
+2 bonus to Attack Rolls. Each attack inflicts 1d4 damage.
Fey chaos: The grimalkin cannot distinguish friend from
foe, indiscriminately attacking the nearest creature.
After 2d4 Rounds: The grimalkin instantly returns to their
humanoid (estray) form.
VULNERABLE TO COLD IRON
As fairies, cold iron weapons inflict +1 damage on
grimalkins. (e.g. a cold iron shortsword would inflict 1d6+1
damage on a grimalkin, rather than the standard 1d6).
GRIMALKIN ADVANCEMENT
Save Targets
Level XP Hit Points Attack Glamours Doom Ray Hold Blast Spell
1 0 1d6 +0 1 11 11 13 15 14
2 2,500 +1d6 +0 2 11 11 13 15 14
3 5,000 +1d6 +1 3 10 10 12 14 13
4 10,000 +1d6 +1 3 10 10 12 14 13
5 20,000 +1d6 +2 4 9 9 11 13 12
6 40,000 +1d6 +2 5 9 9 11 13 12
7 80,000 +1d6 +3 6 8 8 10 12 11
8 160,000 +1d6 +3 6 8 8 10 12 11
9 320,000 +1d6 +4 7 7 7 9 11 10
10 450,000 +1d6 +4 7 7 7 9 11 10
11 580,000 +1 +5 8 6 6 8 10 9
12 710,000 +1 +5 8 6 6 8 10 9
13 840,000 +1 +6 9 5 5 7 9 8
14 970,000 +1 +6 9 5 5 7 9 8
15 1,100,000 +1 +7 10 4 4 6 8 7

=== PAGE 188 ===
186
P a r t e i g h t | a P P e n D i c e S
Mossling Kindred-Class
Gnarled, woody humanoids whose fertile flesh hosts mosses, moulds, and fungi.Gnarled, woody humanoids whose fertile flesh hosts mosses, moulds, and fungi.
Prime Abilities Constitution and Wisdom
Hit Points 1d6 per Level, +2 after Level 10
Combat Aptitude Semi-martial
Armour Any, including shields
Weapons Small and Medium
Native Languages Woldish, Mulch
M
ossling adventurers have a number of useful
capabilities related to fungi and possess minor
magical talents known as knacks.
Starting Equipment
Armour (roll 1d6): 1. Leather armour. 2. Leather armour +
shield. 3. Bark armour. 4. Bark armour + shield. 5. Pinecone
armour. 6. Pinecone armour + shield.
Weapons (roll 1d6 twice): 1. Club. 2. Dagger. 3. Sling + 20
stones. 4. Shortbow + 20 arrows. 5–6. Shortsword.
ARMOUR
Armour must be tailored to mosslings’ small size (see
Tailoring Armour, p119). Mosslings prefer non-metal
armour, and manufacture special suits of armour from
hardened bark and pinecones.
FUNGAL SYMBIOSIS
From Level 4, a mossling may spend 1 Turn to attempt
to enter into a symbiotic agreement with a non-hostile
monstrous fungus.
Level limit: The fungus must be at least 3 Levels lower than
the mossling. For example, a Level 6 mossling is limited to
symbiosis with fungi of Level 3 or lower.
Chance of success: To determine whether the symbiosis
is successful, the mossling must Save Versus Spell. If the
save succeeds the symbiotic pact is agreed.
Once per fungus: Entering into a symbiotic agreement
may be attempted only once per fungus.
Successful symbiosis: Spores from the fungus infest
the mossling’s body, blooming after 1d4 days into fungal
growths riddled throughout their skin and organs. The
mossling may subsequently activate any special trait or
power of the fungus up to once a day per 2 Levels (e.g. up
to 4 times a day at Level 8). Any special attack or defence
forms of the fungus may be activated, including magical
powers. The mossling is immune to any harmful effects.
One symbiosis only: It is not possible to initiate simulta-
neous symbiosis with multiple fungi, and the only way to
reverse or cancel a symbiosis is by use of magic (e.g. the
holy spell Cure Affliction).
Playing a Kindred-Class
Some players prefer the option of a simple archetype for
non-human Kindreds, for example playing a mossling
as opposed to a mossling fighter or a mossling hunter.
If this option is preferred, the player should ignore the
Kindred traits presented on p48. The character only
has the traits listed here.

=== PAGE 189 ===
P a r t e i g h t | a P P e n D i c e S
187
MOSSLING SKILLS
Mosslings have a Skill Target of 5 for Survival when forag-
ing.
KNACKS
Mosslings practice carefully guarded, quasi-magical crafts
known as knacks. Each mossling knows one knack, rolled or
chosen at character creation. See Mossling Knacks, p112.
RESILIENCE
Mosslings are hardy and resilient like the gnarled bole of
an old tree, as indicated by their saving throws. Mosslings
gain an additional +2 bonus to Saving Throws against
fungal spores or poisons.
SYMBIOTIC FLESH
As a mossling ages, their dank, fertile flesh picks up seeds
and spores which germinate into symbiotic plants and
fungi. At each Level (including Level 1), the character
acquires a random trait from the Symbiotic Flesh table.
Duplicates may be re-rolled or taken to indicate an ampli-
fication of the trait.
SYMBIOTIC FLESH
d20 Infestation
1 Outer parts of ears replaced by jelly fungus.
2 Patches of lichen.
3 Dainty flowers bloom in the beard in springtime.
4 Yeast infections in moist places.
5 Toadstools growing from joints.
6 Covered in slimy, green jelly.
7 Miniature tree growing from ear.
8 Skin riddled with mycelia.
9 Eyes fur over with transparent, yellow mould.
10 Edible toe cheese.
11 Growths of woody, bracket fungus in the armpits.
12 Mossy feet.
13 Climbing vines wrapped around limbs and torso.
14 Radical fern growth around groin.
15 Mossy biceps.
16 Puffball growths around the buttocks and knees.
17 Parsley chest hair.
18 Blackberry brambles tangled in the hair.
19 Edible mushrooms growing in hair.
20 Semi-sentient mushroom growing from top of head.
MOSSLING ADVANCEMENT
Save Targets
Level XP Hit Points Attack Doom Ray Hold Blast Spell
1 0 1d6 +0 8 9 10 13 12
2 2,200 +1d6 +0 8 9 10 13 12
3 4,400 +1d6 +1 7 8 9 12 11
4 8,800 +1d6 +1 7 8 9 12 11
5 17,600 +1d6 +2 6 7 8 11 10
6 35,200 +1d6 +2 6 7 8 11 10
7 70,400 +1d6 +3 5 6 7 10 9
8 140,800 +1d6 +3 5 6 7 10 9
9 280,000 +1d6 +4 4 5 6 9 8
10 400,000 +1d6 +4 4 5 6 9 8
11 520,000 +2 +5 3 4 5 8 7
12 640,000 +2 +5 3 4 5 8 7
13 760,000 +2 +6 2 3 4 7 6
14 880,000 +2 +6 2 3 4 7 6
15 1,000,000 +2 +7 2 2 3 6 5

=== PAGE 190 ===
188
P a r t e i g h t | a P P e n D i c e S
Woodgrue Kindred-Class
Bat-faced demi-fey goblins, known for their love of music, revelry, and arson.Bat-faced demi-fey goblins, known for their love of music, revelry, and arson.
Prime Abilities Charisma and Dexterity
Hit Points 1d6 per Level, +1 after Level 10
Combat Aptitude Semi-martial
Armour Any, including shields
Weapons Small and Medium
Native Languages Woldish, Sylvan
W
oodgrues’ excellent hearing, skill at hiding,
and ability to see in darkness make them
excellent scouts and lookouts. Additionally,
their capricious enchanted songs bring an element of anar-
chic humour into any adventuring group.
Starting Equipment
Armour (roll 1d6): 1. Leather armour. 2. Leather armour +
shield. 3. Chainmail. 4. Chainmail + shield. 5. Plate mail. 6.
Plate mail + shield.
Weapons (roll 1d6 twice): 1. Club. 2. 3 daggers. 3. Hand axe.
4. Shortbow + 20 arrows. 5. Shortsword. 6. Sling + 20 stones.
Class items: Musical instrument (wind).
ARMOUR TAILORING
Armour must be tailored to woodgrues’ small size (see
Tailoring Armour, p119).
COMPULSIVE JUBILATION
A woodgrue who witnesses a party, feast, celebration, or
festival must partake; they are utterly compelled with
every fibre of their being. If, for some reason, a woodgrue
wishes to resist this compulsion, they may Save Versus
Spell (but feel drained and downtrodden for the length of
the engagement).
DEFENSIVE BONUS
In melee with Large creatures, woodgrues gain a +2 Armour
Class bonus, due to their small size.
Playing a Kindred-Class
Some players prefer the option of a simple archetype for
non-human Kindreds, for example playing a woodgrue
as opposed to a woodgrue bard or a woodgrue thief. If
this option is preferred, the player should ignore the
Kindred traits presented on p52. The character only
has the traits listed here.

=== PAGE 191 ===
P a r t e i g h t | a P P e n D i c e S
189
WOODGRUE ADVANCEMENT
Save Targets
Level XP Hit Points Attack Doom Ray Hold Blast Spell
1 0 1d6 +0 13 12 14 16 14
2 2,000 +1d6 +0 13 12 14 16 14
3 4,000 +1d6 +1 12 11 13 15 13
4 8,000 +1d6 +1 12 11 13 15 13
5 16,000 +1d6 +2 11 10 12 14 12
6 32,000 +1d6 +2 11 10 12 14 12
7 64,000 +1d6 +3 10 9 11 13 11
8 128,000 +1d6 +3 10 9 11 13 11
9 260,000 +1d6 +4 9 8 10 12 10
10 380,000 +1d6 +4 9 8 10 12 10
11 500,000 +1 +5 8 7 9 11 9
12 620,000 +1 +5 8 7 9 11 9
13 740,000 +1 +6 7 6 8 10 8
14 860,000 +1 +6 7 6 8 10 8
15 980,000 +1 +7 6 5 7 9 7
MAD REVELRY
Once per day per Level, a woodgrue may play one of the
enchanted melodies listed below on a wind instrument
while hooting and dancing terribly.
Subjects: All living creatures within 30′ (including allies)
must Save Versus Spell or be afflicted by the melody. Fair-
ies and demi-fey gain a +2 bonus to the Saving Throw.
Duration: The effects of the melody last as long as the
woodgrue keeps playing. While playing, the woodgrue
may move but cannot attack or perform other actions.
Disrupting: If the woodgrue is harmed or fails a Saving
Throw, they stop playing. Subjects who are harmed or fail
a Saving Throw likewise cease to be affected.
Enchanted Melodies
Confide: Subjects speak in a slurred voice, confessing some
deeply hidden emotion or revealing an ally’s secret.
Dance: Subjects begin dancing a profane, nonsensical jig.
Those affected gain a +1 bonus to Armour Class, but cannot
move from the spot where they dance.
Imbibe: Subjects ravenously consume any liquids (potable
or not), herbs, mushrooms, and such like that are available
and proceed to act as though drunk, suffering a –2 penalty
to Attack Rolls until the revelry ends.
Jape: Subjects mock the immediately preceding occur-
rence, be it a deed of words or acts.
Jubilate: Subjects burst into irrepressible laughter, prevent-
ing them from speech. There is a 1-in-6 chance each Round
of falling over in a laughing fit.
Mount: Subjects attempt to mount nearby creatures, be
they friend or foe, and ride them piggyback (Save Versus
Hold to resist being mounted). Unaffected creatures may
Save Versus Hold once per Round to buck off a rider.
Revel: Subjects cannot speak; instead they bark out terrible
scats of sound, in an attempt to keep up with the wood-
grue’s maddening melodies. Speed is halved if subjects are
not headed in the direction of the woodgrue.
MOON SIGHT
A woodgrue can see in darkness up to 60′, viewing the
world as though it glows in faint moonlight. This does
not incur low light penalties (p150), but fine detail (e.g.
writing) cannot be perceived.
MUSICAL INSTRUMENTS
A woodgrue can employ a musical instrument as a melee
weapon, doing 1d4 damage.
VULNERABLE TO COLD IRON
As demi-fey, cold iron weapons inflict +1 damage on wood-
grues. (e.g. a cold iron shortsword would inflict 1d6+1
damage on a woodgrue, rather than the standard 1d6).
WOODGRUE SKILLS
Woodgrues have a Skill Target of 5 for Listen. They also have
one extra specialised skill. The Woodgrue Skill Targets table
lists the character’s Skill Targets as they advance in Level.
Stealth
Hiding: A woodgrue may make a Stealth Check to remain
undetected when shadows are the only cover available. See
Hiding and Ambushes under Stealth, p154.
Sneaking: If a Surprise Roll indicates that a woodgrue’s
party has been detected, the woodgrue may make a Stealth
Check to remain undetected. See Surprise, p164 and
Sneaking under Stealth, p154.
WOODGRUE SKILL TARGETS
Level Stealth Level Stealth
1 6 6 4
2 6 7 3
3 5 8 3
4 5 9 2
5 4 10+ 2

=== PAGE 192 ===
190
P a r t e i g h t | a P P e n D i c e S
Thanks
Noble individuals whose support made this game possible.Noble individuals whose support made this game possible.
D
olmenwood has been many years in the making.
Deepest gratitude to my wonderful wife and
daughter, whose support has enabled seeds to
grow into a bounteous forest. Endless thanks also to Noah
Green, without whom the project would have foundered,
and to everyone at Exalted Funeral, who ushered Dolmen-
wood into physical existence.
PATREON BACKERS
Thanks to all backers of the Dolmenwood Patreon, whose
support and encouragement helped bring Dolmenwood
into the world. Special thanks to Woodgrue tier backers,
whose names are carven upon the Weirdstone:
1, 2dog, A Jones, A Smith, A.M. Valentine, Aaron Dalman, Aaron Davis,
Aaron Fenwick, Aaron Helton, Aaron Holt, Aaron Lutomski, Aaron
Morgan, Aaron Prince, Aaron Seigo, Aaron W Scott, Abby Henríquez
Tejera, Abelard, Abigail L., Adam Donovan, Adam Hebert, Adam Koelsch,
Adam Nelson, Adam Sternberg, Adam Stewart, Adam the DM, Adrian
Kelly, Adrian Schauer, Advik Goel, AgentP, Aidan Kelly, Aidan Krott,
Ákos Medveczki, Al Carino, Alex Bice, Alex Ciolli, Alex Genn-Bash,
Alex Gosnold, Alex Haugen, Alex Huddleston, Alex Mamaev, Alex
Martinez, Alex Spalding, Alex Tokarczyk, Alex Worsley, Alex
Yeghiazarian, Alexander Eremin, Alexander Jatscha-Zelt, Alexander
Prang, Alexander Price, Alexander Scott, Alexander von Bose, Alexandre
Huot, Ali Bencheikh, Alien Boogaloo, Alix Bosley, Alix Palmer, Aljoscha
Beyer, Allan Rodda, allan wakefield, Amanda Vo, AmPm, Anais Bir,
Anders Bersten, Andrea, Andrea Costantini, Andrea Maurizio Medici,
Andrea Rossi, Andreas Müller, Andres Zanzani, Andrew Hurley, Andrew
Nichols, Andrew Nickolls, Andrew Savin, Andrew Williams, Andrzej
Jarzabek, Andy Action, Andy Evans, Andy Hemming, Andy Webber,
Angry Skeleton Pope, Anthony Adkins, Anthony Bird, Anthony del Pino,
Anthony Fucina, Anthony Garner, Anthony Ratcliffe, Antoine Polignone,
Are Sørli, Arjen Lissenberg, Arnaud Kirschvinck, Artur Biba, Ary
Ramsey, Asbjørn Flø, Ashley R, Atsu333, Auston J Butler, Ava Islam, Avi
Glanzer, AWGM, B Idris, B L, Ballinson, Barry Donnelly, Bassemand,
Bee Enby, Bee Healy, Beefsen, Ben, Ben Costa & James Parks, Ben
Hammer, Ben Lewis, Ben Nash, Ben Otto, Benat Urquijo, Benjamin Dike,
Benjamin Sherwood, Benjamin Wenham, Bernhard Gruber, Bernhard
Witschka, Bestiaries, big knife, Bill Abbey, Bill Hart, Bill Jaimez, Billy
Longino, Bjørn Benjaminsen, BleepBlarf, Bleeps, BlueDragon,
Bluewolf3406, Bob Holt, bobonthenet, BoloniusMonk, Bones McCoy,
Brad Gehrig, Bradley Sullivan, Brandon D Smith, Brandon Hale, Brandon
Johnson, Brandon Roden, Brandon Thompson, Brandon Ungar, Brandon
Webster, Brendan Daly, Brendan Lyle, Brendan Miller, Brennan Harcus,
Brent Ritchey, Brent Weber, Brent Wisdom, Brenton Sheehan, Brett
Hickinbotham, Brett M. Welch, Brian, Brian Burnley, Brian C. Barry,
Brian Houle, Brian Johnstone, Brian Joyce, Brian Meyers, Brian Mitchell,
Brian Mohr, Brian Richmond, Brian T Dowd, Brian Timms, Bryan Cox,
Bryan Milstid, Brynn, ButterLlamas, Byron, c l, C.R. Alexander, Caelin
Araven, Cai Duncan, Caitlin Rochlin, Caleb Pennell, Caleb Spencer, Calla
Avens, Calum Grace, Calvin Bulla, Camul, Carl Ellis, Carl Lefler, Carl
Meyer, Carlos Cassó Domínguez, Carter McKie, Casey Evans, Casey
Frechette, Catherine Harrison, Caz, Celeste Matthews, César Aguilera,
César Fernández de las Heras, César Fraisseix, Chad Giusti, Chad Riley,
Chad Vest, Chameleon Fam, Charles, Charlie Walls, Chase Reinhart,
Chris, Chris Bloxham, Chris Borror, Chris Branches, Chris Callison-
Burch, Chris Crawshaw, Chris Gilbert, Chris Harris, Chris Laumer, Chris
LeDoux, Chris Lites, Chris Martel, Chris Mertes, Chris Milsaps, Chris
Peterson, Chris Scales, Chris Spicer, Chris Stagno, Chris Tullo, Christaugh
Rochel, Christian Bennett, Christian Burkhard, Christian Doucette,
Christian Haines, Christian Kolbe, Christian Rainey, Christian
Torstensson, Christian West, Christopher Aufdenberg, Christopher Brown,
Christopher Käck, Christopher Maikisch, Christopher Marvin,
Christopher Matz, Christopher R Smith, Christopher Taylor, Christopher
Von Wilczur, Citizen Arcane, Claudio Cabrini, Claus Boe, Clay Liford,
Clicky, Clive Stewart, clob, Clrcbuckfast, Cody Frost, cody gillett, Cody
Leightenheimer, Cody Mazza, Cody Reichenau, Colby Schreiber, Colin
Malone, Colton King, Colton Terry, connor gallagher, Connor Shartle,
Connor Stimson, Conrad Harkrader, Corrin, Corvo Gi, Cory Swearingane,
Craig Paterson, Craig Savino, Creative Role-Play Academy, Cricket The
Dragon, Cuffer, Curtis Wilson, Cutter Goode, D. Raynes III, DaBo, Dalton
Rose, Dameon Gaynor, Damian Krzyśko, Damon Dougherty, Damon
Hawkins, Dan Quilty, Dan Santospirito, Dan Webb, daniel, Daniel A.
Mason, Daniel Backus, Daniel Beathalter, Daniel Chartier, Daniel Cope,
Daniel Frohlich, Daniel Gastelum, Daniel Grady, Daniel Griffin, Daniel
Harkins, Daniel Heronime, Daniel Hoffmann, Daniel Martin, Daniel Skov
Madsen, Daniel Soukup, Daniel Stewart, Daniele, Danijel Štriga, Danny
Anderson, Danny Hofmann, Danyel Baillie, Dario Camaioni, Dario Filidei,
Darrick Dahl, Darrin Piotrowski, Darwak, Daryl Burns, Dasail, Dave
Ellingwood, Dave West, David Babbitt, David Ballway, David Bietila,
David Butler, David Caulkins, David Charlton, David Eitelbach, David
Englefield, David Finley, David Gileus, David Harris, David Hipkin, David
Huttleston Jr, David Johnston, David Lim, David Linke, David Marsh,
David Maynard, David Moreau, David Perry, David Rajkay, David Rezak,
David Sealy, David Smith, David Somerville, David Southall, David
Valentine, David Weeks, David West, David Whittaker, David Woodhouse,
David Wright, Davis Doersam, Davis Walker, Denis J Mc Carthy, Dennis
Sieg, Denny Scalf, Derek Bizier (The Halfling Master), Derek Carbonneau,
Derek Montroy, Derick Varn, Derrick Cunningham, Devin G Pike, dicefist,
Diederik van Arkel, Diego A Amaya Madero, Diego GM, Diego Martinez,
Dilarus, Dimitrios Anagnostakis, DM GodComplex, DMTimothy,
Domenico Panaro, Dominic Lopez, Dominic Mooney, Dominick Souza,
Domonic Cusimano, Don Porter, Doni Patrisso, Dor Hanner, Doug Justice,
Douglas Meserve, Douglas Topper, Doyle W Tavener, Dragon Snacks Dan,
Drew Bergstrom, Drew Chandler, DrixLab, DrVesuvius, Dudás Tamás,
Dude, Duncan Adams, DuneWalker, Dustin Cobb, Dwayne Boothe, Dylan
Kearney, Echo Byrnes, EdibleAnarchy, Eduardo Carabaño, Eduardo Ortiz
Frau, Edward Bromley, Edward Marchena, Edward Romo, Edwin King,
egg, Eli Carley, Eli Hobbs, Eli Kilgore, Elia Alessandro Calderan, Elliott
Davidson, Elliott Moshell, Eloris 0w0, Eloy Cintron, Elysia, Emilia
Stjernfelt, Emiliano Vazquez, Emma Jones, Enoch Starnes, Enrico Marulli,
Eoghan O'Meara, Eric, Eric Bahr, Eric DeCourcey, Eric Gilreath, Eric
Haste, Eric Marseis, Eric Rumfelt, Eric Setterberg, Eric Steen, Erich
Tolbert, Erick Pierce, Erik Braaten, Erik Eliason, Erik Tandberg, Erin
Jungjohann, Ernest Sullivan, Ernesto, Errin Larsen, Eruditeredux, Erwan
Gas, Esau Crouch, Eskatonic Monk, Esteban Olivares, Evan Van Elkins,
exilautor, Fabio Milito Pagliara, Feagal, FeBommel, fiendly friend, Filip,
Firehawk, Florian Lamarque, flyaturtle, Forrest Rose, Fran Malecho,
Francesco, Francesco Maggio, Franco Galz, Francois Tarrida, Frank Cook,
Frank Espen Larsen, Frank Roetker, Frankie Wakefield, Franz Schädler,
Fred Ben, Fred Joly, Fred The Gnomeish, Frédérik Rating, Freya Gilbert,
Freya Weil, Fridge Largemeat, frogboy, Frowin Dörr, Funny name, Gabe
LaBelle, Gabriel Bishop, Gabriel Negrete, Gabriel Robinson, Gabriel
Rossman, Gabriele Ficara, Games With Dave, Garrett Jensen, Gary Ball,
Gavin Romig-Koch, Geir Arveschoug Erikstad, General Nutt, Geoffrey
Goffin, Gerald Davidson, Gergely Hangyas, Gian Maria Sandigliano,
Gianfranco Bux, Gideon Lazar, Giles Nevill, Ginny Baez, Girk Dently,
gnlpfl, GohandoMax, Goncalo Caneira, Goorie, Göran, Gorgone Milke,
Graham Day, Graham R, Grant G., Greg Arnold, Greg Bullmer, Greg
McAllister, Greg Spiller, Gregory M Hicks, Gregory Syferd, Grendel,
Grevil, Grimsylbar, Guilherme Providello, Gus Badnell, Gus H, Gustaf
Gadd, Guto Jardim, Guy Potts, Gwyllgi, H. Notelteirs, Haden Epperson,
Hakeem41, Halifax Warburton, Han Dandler, Hannah Brate, Hans-Harald
Hartmann, Happy Myconid, Harleston, Harry Piper, haudhgûl, Hayk
Martirosyan, Heath Aldrich, hellionyessir, Henry Ferguson-Gow, Hernan
Perez-Mckay, Heron Prior, Hirvonen, Hyrum, Iain Whittaker, Ian, Ian
Gibson, Ian Lynch, Ian Schenck, Ibogre, Ignovus, Igor Piltz, Ilmari Korpi,
Ilona Prikule, Inverse Alien, Isaac L. Wheeler, Isabell Düwel, Isobel
Mulkern, Iuri Bauler, Ivan Richmond, J C, J Holland, J Port, J. Sebastian
Pagani, Jack Pullman, Jack S, Jack Tolven, Jack-O-Bear, Jacob Kent, Jacob
Marks, Jacob Phillips, Jacob Warrens, Jacqueline Legazcue, Jake Bruce,
Jake Mix, Jake Pasanen, James Anderson, James Butler, James Carlson,
James Doig, James Ham, James Hopefl, James Illingworth, James Larson,
James Neal, James Page, James Pyne, James Smith, James Stambaugh,
James Stepp, James Torr, Jan Tangermann, Jan Tutgut, Jared Reichman,
Jared Thibault, Jason Bell, Jason Blasso, Jason Brown, Jason Burke, Jason
Coleman, Jason Ellsworth, Jason Huibregtse, Jason Inman, Jason Jones,
Jason King, Jason Miller, Jason Morris, Jason Palfrey, Jason Parks, Jason

=== PAGE 193 ===
P a r t e i g h t | a P P e n D i c e S
191
Rood, Jason Ross, Jason Vasche, Jayden Nolan, Jean Gamba, Jean-Pierre
Ollivier, Jeff Eff, Jeff Faller, Jeff Kamo, Jeff Mackewicz, Jeff Robinson,
Jeff Scifert, Jeff Toney, Jeffery Hines, Jeffrey D Lowe, Jeffrey Scott Hessell,
Jens Jakobsen, Jeppe Mulich, Jeramie Parenteau, Jeremiah E. Sprague,
Jeremy, Jeremy "Father Goose" Shuman Jr., Jeremy Abernathy, Jeremy
Brown, Jeremy C. Griffin, Jeremy Ryan, Jeremy S. Barnes, Jeremy
Waterkotte, Jesse Davenport, Jesse Rodriguez, Jesse Ross, Jesse Stanley,
Jesse Webster, Jessica Flood, Jessica Nickelsen, Jessica Peck, Jessie Gibbs,
Jestro, Jgold9, Jim Havoc, Jim Krueger, Jim Lewis, Jim Michnowicz, Jim
Middleton, Jim Parkin, Jim Power, Jim Roof, Jim Stryker, João Talassa,
João Victor, Joaquin Batet, Jody Grantham, Joe Acone, Joe Bontrager, Joe
Johaneman, Joe Vinciguerra, Joel Sanda, Joey Richards, Joey Trapp,
Johannes Stål, John, John Barleycorn, John C. Randall, John Cantrell, John
Case Tompkins, John Daniel Geerdes, John Doherty, John Essle, John
Golden, John Hockersmith, John Joseph Maloney III, John Kurviany, John
Martinez, John Michael Hess, John Milligan, John Moher, John Riccardi,
John Schwartz, John Smith, John Wilson, Johnathan Rhoades, Johnny
Marchione, Jon Boylan, Jon Gilmore, Jon Tate, Jon Tzimiskes, Jonas
Eriksson, Jonas Vilnius, Jonatan Dørge, Jonathan Britton, Jonathan
Garrison, Jonathan Hansen, Jonathan Hastings, Jonathan Phillips, Jonathan
Stuard, Jonathan Z. Smith, Jonathas, Joonas R, Jordan Knox, Jordan Lucas,
Jordan Rudd, Jordon Chadwick, Jorge Albor, Jorge Sanchez, Jose Moreno,
Jose Trujillo, Joseph Blankenship Jr., Joseph Blondino, Joseph Chambliss,
Joseph Farkas, Joseph Holsapple, Joseph Krausz, Joseph White, Joseph
Zielazinski, Josh Dillon, Josh Sykes, Joshua Crowther, Joshua Hicks,
Joshua James, Joshua N Medium Teeshirt, Joshua Pavlico, Joshua Ward,
Joshua Williams, JPM Skywizard, Julian Breen, julienmondoloni, Julio
Chavez, Jussi Jokinen, Justin Counter, Justin Gillam, Justin Hamilton,
Justin McClure, Justin Steele, Justo, Justus Houchins, Kaan Kafka,
KammaKhazi, Karl Bool, Karl Hohnisch, Karol Baranowicz, Kasper
Clemmensen, Katherine Werner, Katja Lehtinen, Kedric Sewell, Keene
Lam, Keiran Harcombe, Keith W, kekyoin02, Kelly Roberge, Ken Taylor,
Kenny Crowe, Kent Anhari, Kevin Carr, Kevin Landdeck, Kevin
MacDermid, Kevin O'Reilly, Kevin Toy, Kevin Wall, Keyan Mohsenin,
kindi, KingOfZhoops, KirinSoul, Kolya Kawall, Konate, Koraka,
Koroviev, Kostas Pappas, KraftyMattKraft, Krill, Kristian Magnusson,
Kristopher Hedley, Kurt McMahon, Kyle Bjorem, Kyle G, Kyle Hettinger,
Kyle Oppy, LaneH, Larry Curtis, Larry Eger, Laurence Roberts, Lawrence
Daley, Le Chevalier, Leah Collins, Lēoht Steren, Leon Harvey, Leon
Powell, Leonard O’Grady, Leonardo Prunk, Leonardo Rosin da Silva,
Lewis Hubbard, Lhun, Liam Perry, Liam Thomson, Literate, Lobo, Logan
Potts, Lonnie Daniel, Lord St. John, LordofMuck, Louis Byrne, Louis
Counter, Louis Thunder Badger, Lucas Ancke, Lucas Belzer, Lucas de
Camargos, Lucas Hankins, Lucas MacClure, Lucia Rahberger, Luciano,
Lucille L. Blumire, Lucio de Siqueira, LuckyLegs, Luis Melero, Luka De
Souza, Lukáš Gomboš, Luke Broderick, Luke Brown, Luke Johnson, Luke
Magnan, Luna_Loveless, Lyle Stirk, Lysan Lurraxol, M E Doyle, M. S.
Shoemaker, MacDhomnuill Games, Machinic, Maciej Witosławski,
Magdalene, Mal3, Malcolm Serabian, Manny the Friendliest Orc, Manu
HipsteRPG, Marc Braden, Marc Focke, Marc Tabyanan, Marco Benti,
Marco Carmosino, Marcus Flores, Marcus Hill, Mario Fleischmann,
Marius Black, Mark 'Antman' Brooks, Mark Craddock, Mark Dyson, Mark
McGee, Mark Mckinney, Mark Mealman, Mark Miller, Mark Sarver, Mark
Schumann, Mark.D, Marko van Treeck, Markus Wagner, Marshall
Caouette, Marshall Súileabáin, Martin E Von Cannon, Martin Lecointe,
Martin Legg, Martin Mandler, Martin St-Laurent, Martin Welsh, Mat
Fowler, Mateusz Tondera, Mathieu G, Mats Kristoffersen, Matt, Matt
Bruner, Matt Hancock, Matt Hildebrand, Matt Jackson, Matt Kurowski,
Matt Morrissette, Matt Price, Matt Walsh, Matt Wildeboer, Matteo Turra,
Matthew Barclay, Matthew Benton, Matthew Briggs, Matthew Buban,
Matthew Fee, Matthew Frumento, Matthew Gagan, Matthew Isaac,
Matthew Mantsch, Matthew Matis, Matthew McLoughlin, Matthew
Morris, Matthew Muncy, Matthew R. Krempski “Discordian Laureate”,
Matthias Wasser, Matthieu Eisenberg, Matti Kurrika, Mattia Di Ciollo,
Max Engel, Max Maloney, Max Martin, Max Schneider, Max Steele,
Maxwell Arnold, May Burningham, MCCXLIV, McNitro, MeleeGames,
Melvin Hostman, Merlin Slothbear, Michael, Michael Alkema, Michael
Boyle, Michael Burke, Michael C Blaser, Jr., Michael Cuomo, Michael
Curtis, Michael Delicate, Michael E. Brown, Michael Gorsuch, Michael
Hamilton, Michael Harrington, Michael Jermann, Michael Kukuk
Sperling, Michael Mistretta, Michael Nguyen, Michael Nusbaum, Michael
Paulini, Michael Praskavich, Michael Ramoneda, Michael Ruiz, Michael
Schilling, Michael Simington, Michael Torres, Michael Walker, Michael
Whitt, Michal Riečanský, Michał Witkowski, Michelle, Mickael Cox,
Miguel Antón, Mihai, Mihails Strasuns, Mikael Theorin, Mike Fennell,
Mike Graham, Mike Jones, Mike Pfaff, Mikey Mank, Miles Morgenstern,
Miłosz Świerad, Misando, mista tipsta, Mistigri, MoldvayINC.,
moonbicky, Morgan Dellamore, Mr Dood, muckdart, Mudra Vales, nacho
vega, Nash Stewart, Nat The Kat, Natalie Dawson, Nathan, Nathan Farrey,
Nathan Fenwick, Nathan Pointer, Nathan Sharon, Nathanael Hile,
Nathanael Keller, Neal Dalton, Neal Tanner, Neale Carter, Nectarios
Andrews, Neil Reigelsperger, Neil Weaving, neko, Nesahdo Shunatona,
NHS28, Nic McJannet, Nicholas Arnold, Nicholas Duncanson, Nicholas
J. Taylor, Nicholas L. Goodman, Nicholas MacDonald-Wu, Nicholas Smith,
Nicholas Sokeland, Nick Armet, Nick J., Nick Kenyon, Nick Lutz, Nicola
Degobbis, Nicolas Duchesne, Nicolas Legrand, Nicole Faccini, Nik Walne,
Nikolai Rikoff, Nikolaus Matheis, nl3ss, Noah Green, Noel Borstad,
Nonplayable, NorthernWeird, Not Telling, nurio, Ola Andersson, Oliver
Knox, Oliver Thurley, Olivier Brassard, Olivier Scheeck, Ominous Olive,
Ondřej "Muzzug" Kadlec, Orchid, Ordinal, OrkBoss, Oscar Lloyd, Owen
Edwards, Øystein Haarklau Johansen, Øyvind Heilo, Paavo Hirn, Padraig
Taggart, Panos Tsakiris, Papa Zaph, Pasha Koskins, Patrick Dean, Patrick
P., Patrick Sandoval, Patrick Whited, Patrik Standar, Paul Gales, Paul
Hermesmeier, Paul Hoepker, Paul Ligorski, Paul Limb, Paul Morgan, Paul
Oliver, Paul Ramer, Paul Savas, Paul Sementilli, Paul Skowron, Paul Stark,
Pedro Bernardo, Peepeetugboat, permanganate7, Perry Tarantine, Peter
Hahn, Peter Jordan, Peter Leban, Peter Smith-Barton, Phil D, Phil
Dempster, Philip Carr, Philip Glass, Philipp Elbers, Philipp Zinnkann,
Philippe Delmotte, Philippe Ouellet, Phillip Alram, Phullo, Pierre Staron,
Piotr Tomaszewski, Pixellance, PJ Meacham, PotatoBomb, Prince of
Cinders, Prizren Buçpapaj, PrMatteus, ProfNu Ton, Quentin Maltman,
Quinn Hartman, Rainer Bachleitner, Randall J. Harris, Random Wookie,
Randoulph SC, Randy Andrews, Rane Man, Raphael Herrera, Raphael
Itzykson, Raul D. M. Rocha, Ray & The Journeymen, Rayje, Raymond
Bennett, Red Dice Diaries, redib, RedRonin, Reese Adams, Regolov,
Revenant Rogue, Rexilopolillious, Ricardo Sedan, Riccardo Bolo, Richard
Blackburn, Richard Cornman, Richard Markert, Richard Rohlin, Rick
Broadhurst, Rick LaRue, Ricky Lluberes, Riku M., risky boots, Rob Culp,
Rob Morrison, Robert Alvis, Robert Coleman, Robert Conway, Robert
Fox, Robert Newman, Robert Parker, Robert Shurmer, Robert Teszka,
Robin Crass, Robin Goodfellow, Robin Green, Rod Nedlose, Rodney Pitts,
Rodrigo Freitas, Rodrigo M. A. Fernandes, Roll to Save, Roman Pearah,
Rompcat, Ron Crockett, Ron Yang, Rookseye, Rory Starks, Rory Voie,
Roxual Barger, Rudy Randolph, Rueben Singh, Rupert Cole, Russ Boxley,
Russell Hoyle, Russell White, Ryan D. Wymer, Ryan Dickmann, Ryan
Enright, Ryan Homan, Ryan MacWilliams, Ryan Mahawili, Ryan Pierson,
Ryan Schaller, Ryan Spencer, Ryan Vollrath, ryan whitcome, Ryan
Wiedeman, S Kraus, Sacha Gauthier, Sam Anderson, Sam Boland, Sam
Doorley, Sam Dyson, Sam Jenkins, Sam Slocum, Sam Stoddard, Sam
Watson, Sami Mobarak-Sadokierski, Sammi Hadert, Samuel Higgins,
Samuel March, Sarainy, Sasha Morsmith, Sawson Salehpour,
scorpiomancer, Scott Craig, Scott Dexter, Scott Langston, Scott McCombs,
Scott Shafer, Scott Shinners, Scott Yearsley, Scrovax, Sean Brawley, Sean
Burke, Sean Devereux, Sean Eyre, Sean Golyer, Sean K Mannion, Sean
McStravick, Sean Payne, Sean Simon, Sean The Stonegiant Stone,
Sébastien Tecchio, Sedge Lewis, seejee, Selenebun, Serge Petitclerc, Seth
Bunton, Seth Hutchinson, Seth Szymanski, Shane Earl Dodson, Shane
Madden, Shawn Gray, Shawn Perry, Shawn Roy, Shawn Witham,
ShellBackBeau, Shichizu, shocktrooper710, Silent, Simon, Simon Barns,
Simon Hacking, Simon Kightley, Simon Weller, Simon Widman, Simone
Connola, SimpleGoblin, slime witch, Snnooze, Snoddas, Snorre Ulvin
Garberg, Snowman0147, Sofia Batlle, Spider Goat, Spout Morin, Spyros
Gkiouzepas, Squiggy!, Starlock, Stefan Olsén, Stefan Zajdler, Stéphane
Benoît, Stephen Dominick, Stephen Mulrooney, Stephen Murrish, Stephen
Rodenmayer, Stephen Willson, Steve Carman, Steve Checker, Steve Dove,
Steve Hyatt, Steve Roach, Steven Atteberry, Steven August Finley, Steven
Fader, Steven Phillips, Steven Roman, Stian Torjussen, Stijn Van Hove,
suburbanmoonlanding, Suthernfried, Svebor Midzic, Syzegy, Taber
McFarlin, TakoyJMB, Tallyogarro, Talon Gorman, Talon Koch, Tamas
Jakab, Taneous, TeaAndSpite, Tears Of A Muppet, Ted Houghtaling, Terry
Barney, Terry Broadbent, Terry Lago, Thaddeus G Moore, The 6d9!, The
Archphilarch, The Endless Slug, The Multiculturalist James (The MC
James), The Pryory, The Sage Experiment, The Simple DM,
TheBigBadBear, They Were Monsters, Thomas Balazsy, Thomas Bunch,
Thomas Dale, Thomas Darlington, Thomas Funck, Thomas Lauth, Thomas
M Beckham, Thomas Schrader, Thomas Seelinger, Tim Czarnecki, Tim
Drisdelle, Tim Earley, Tim Hennessey, Tim Koppang, Tim Leitner, Tim
Loughrist, Tim Pudoff, Tim Snider, Tim Thiessen, Timo Juhala, Timothy
Ratcliff, Timothy Reilly, Timothy Sappington, Tobias, Tobias Kløver, Todd
Agthe, Todd Estabrook, Tom, Tom Cashman, Tom Rogers, Tom Young,
Toni Lappalainen, Tony Lang, Tormsa, Tracey, Travis Bowman, Travis
Chase, Travis Vance, Tray Batson, Trent Hayes, Trevor Stickney, Trey
Jangaard, Triceranuke, Trip Top, Troy Ellis, Troy Winfrey, Tuomas
Lempiäinen, Turbo Jorgensen, Twenty Sides to Every Story, Ty Cox, Ty
Morris, Tyler A Childers, Tyler Arkes, Tyler Christian, Tyler Cole, Tyler
Earnest, Tyler O'Connell, UndeadCellar, Vicki B, Víctor Jiménez Merino,
victorgonal, Viktor Ahlberg, Ville Pilssari, VPotter, Warband Gaming,
Warren L. Denning, warriorJuJu, Weldon Wiyninger, Wes Fournier,
Wicked Ink, Will Davies, Will Schweikert, William Boardman, William
Hollar, William Howard, William Jackson, William Littlefield, William
Mayorga, William Parker, William Poisson, William Smith, William
Sterns, wintermute, WMKidde, Wrankle, Wyatt Hicks, Xiphosura, Zach
Haas, Zach Henderson, Zach Rebey, Zach Schultz, Zachary Kallus,
Zachary Lambert, Zachary Murray, Zachary Pansini, Zachary Taylor,
Zachary Wills, Zachary Zahringer, Zachery Bir, Zack D, Zane Sterling,
Zennec, Ziga Paradzik, Zix, Виктор Ляшок.

=== PAGE 194 ===
192
P a r t e i g h t | a P P e n D i c e S
Credits
Who created what.Who created what.
ART
Lorenzo Colangeli
Art on page 53 © 2024 Lorenzo Colangeli.
Greg Gorgonmilk
Noble house coats of arms © Necrotic Gnome 2024.
Pauliina Hannuniemi
Art on page 5, 7, 10, 17, 29, 56, 59, 71, 76, 100, 114, 121, 125, 136,
139, 145, 172 © 2024 Pauliina Hannuniemi. Art on page 103,
105, 108, 109, 110, 111 © 2024 Necrotic Gnome.
Jana Heidersdorf
Art on page 39, 41, 47, 95, 183 © 2024 Jana Heidersdorf. Art
on page 63, 182 © 2024 Necrotic Gnome.
Aaron Howdle
Brown fill-in art © Necrotic Gnome 2024.
Chris Huth
Art on page 1, 4, 11, 28, 57, 76, 115, 136, 173 © 2024 Chris Huth.
Tom Kilian
Art on page 30, 35, 43, 49, 51, 55, 67, 96, 106, 107, 113, 155, 180,
181, 188 © 2024 Tom Kilian.
Elliot Lang
Art on page 65, 72, 92, 93, 151, 166, 167, 169 © 2024 Necrotic
Gnome.
Ellie Livingston
Art on page 68 © 2024 Necrotic Gnome.
Jonathan Newell
Player’s map of Dolmenwood © Necrotic Gnome 2024.
(Coloured by Zach Kallus.)
Kyle Patterson
Art on page 22, 23, 24, 45, 146, 147, 152, 154, 160, 162, 164, 165 ©
2024 Necrotic Gnome.
Rachel Quinlan
Art on page 175 © 2024 Rachel Quinlan.
Mish Scott
Art on page 6, 13, 33, 123, 124, 129, 131 © 2024 Mish Scott.
Ulla Thynell
Cover art © 2024 Ulla Thynell.
Andrew Walter
Art on page 26, 186 © 2024 Andrew Walter.
Letty Wilson
Art on page 3, 37, 78, 79, 82, 84, 85, 97, 98, 153, 185, 187 © 2024
Necrotic Gnome.
WRITING
Gavin Norman
All content in this book, except as noted otherwise.
Greg Gorgonmilk
Elements and original conception of grimalkins.
Amelia Luke
Some breggle trinkets. Elf trinkets. Mossling trinkets.
Grimalkin trinkets. Woodgrue trinkets.
James Spahn
On Role-Playing Games. Example of Combat (with Gavin
Norman). Chapter introduction quotes (except Classes).
Brian Yaksha
Woodgrues. Woodgrue male / female names. Some human
surnames.
SETTING CONCEPTION
Dolmenwood was originally conceived by Gavin Norman
and Greg Gorgonmilk in 2013. It was partially developed in
the Wormskin zine (2015–2018), before being fully realised
in the Dolmenwood Player’s Book, Dolmenwood Campaign
Book, and Dolmenwood Monster Book.
INSPIRATION
Thanks to the originators of early Dungeons & Dragons—
Gary Gygax, Dave Arneson, John Eric Holmes, Tom Mold-
vay, Steve Marsh, Dave Cook, Frank Mentzer—upon whose
work the rules of Dolmenwood are founded.
Thanks to Jeff Rients and Justin Alexander for the concept
of the Dungeon Doom table (p163).

=== PAGE 195 ===


=== PAGE 196 ===
DD
olmenwood is a weird fairy tale adventure game, conjuringolmenwood is a weird fairy tale adventure game, conjuring
the wonder, horror, whimsy, and strangeness of Britishthe wonder, horror, whimsy, and strangeness of British
folklore. Included in this book:folklore. Included in this book:
▶▶ An introduction to theAn introduction to the intrigues and mysteriesintrigues and mysteries of Dolmenwood.of Dolmenwood.
▶▶ 6 Kindreds:6 Kindreds: goat-headed breggles, starry-eyed elves, tricksomegoat-headed breggles, starry-eyed elves, tricksome
grimalkin cat-fairies, everyday humans, fungus-riddled mosslings,grimalkin cat-fairies, everyday humans, fungus-riddled mosslings,
and bat-faced woodgrues.and bat-faced woodgrues.
▶▶ 9 Classes:9 Classes: bard, cleric, enchanter, fighter, friar, hunter, knight,bard, cleric, enchanter, fighter, friar, hunter, knight,
magician, and thief.magician, and thief.
▶▶ 4 kinds of magic:4 kinds of magic: mighty arcane workings, fairy glamours andmighty arcane workings, fairy glamours and
runes, holy prayers to the saints, and the odd knacks of mosslings.runes, holy prayers to the saints, and the odd knacks of mosslings.
▶▶ Flavourful equipmentFlavourful equipment with lists of adventuring gear, arms,with lists of adventuring gear, arms,
mounts, hounds, tavern fare, beverages, pipeleafs, fungi, and herbs.mounts, hounds, tavern fare, beverages, pipeleafs, fungi, and herbs.
▶▶ Complete game rulesComplete game rules, including easy-to-follow procedures for, including easy-to-follow procedures for
travel, camping, foraging, dungeon delving, encounters, combat,travel, camping, foraging, dungeon delving, encounters, combat,
and downtime.and downtime.
A dv ent ur e A nd Per il in FA iry tA le Woods
The complete player’s guide to the beguiling realm ofThe complete player’s guide to the beguiling realm of
Dolmenwood—a moss-clad forest on the borders ofDolmenwood—a moss-clad forest on the borders of
Fairy, rife with intrigue, secrets, and magic. Step then,Fairy, rife with intrigue, secrets, and magic. Step then,
bold and foolhardy adventurer, into the tangled Woodbold and foolhardy adventurer, into the tangled Wood
and beware, for little here is as it seems.and beware, for little here is as it seems.
Core book 1 of 3. Referees also need theCore book 1 of 3. Referees also need theDolmenwoodDolmenwood
Campaign BookCampaign Book and theand theDolmenwood Monster BookDolmenwood Monster Book..
Contains adult themes and elements of horror.Contains adult themes and elements of horror.
May not be suitable for children.May not be suitable for children.
PDF ISBNPDF ISBN
979-8-88756-116-5979-8-88756-116-5

=== PAGE 197 ===


=== PAGE 198 ===


=== PAGE 199 ===


=== PAGE 200 ===
ADVENTURING GEAR
Item Cost (gp)
Backpack 4
Barrel 1
Bedroll 2
Bell (miniature) 1
Belt pouch 1
Block and tackle 5
Bucket 1
Caltrops (bag of 20) 1
Candles (10) 1
Casket (iron, large) 30
Casket (iron, small) 10
Chain (10′ long) 30
Chalk (10 sticks) 1
Chest (wooden, large) 5
Chest (wooden, small) 1
Chisel 2
Clothes, common 1
Clothes, extravagant 100
Clothes, fine 20
Cooking pots 3
Crowbar 10
Firewood (8 hours) 1
Italics: Only available in towns / cities.
Item Cost (gp)
Fishing rod and tackle 4
Grappling hook 20
Habit, friar’s 2
Hammer (sledgehammer) 5
Hammer (small) 2
Holy symbol (gold) 100
Holy symbol (silver) 25
Holy symbol (wooden) 5
Holy water (vial) 25
Ink (vial) 1
Iron spikes (12) 1
Lantern (bullseye) 10
Lantern (hooded) 5
Lock 20
Magnifying glass 3
Manacles 15
Marbles (bag of 20) 1
Mining pick 3
Mirror (small) 5
Musical instr. (stringed) 20
Musical instr. (wind) 5
Oil (flask) 1
Item Cost (gp)
Paper or parch. (2 sheets) 1
Pole (10′ long, wooden) 1
Quill 1
Rations (fresh, 1 day) 1
Rations (preserved, 1 day) 2
Robes, ritual 10
Rope (50′ long) 1
Rope ladder (25′ long) 5
Sack 1
Saw 1
Scroll case 1
Shovel 2
Spell book (blank) 100
Tent 20
Thieves’ tools 25
Tinder box 3
Torches (3) 1
Twine (100′ ball) 1
Vial (glass) 1
Waterskin 1
Whistle 1
Winter cloak 2
WEAPONS
Weapon Damage Cost (gp) Weight Size
Battle axe 1d8 7 100 M
Club 1d4 3 20 M
Crossbow 1d8 30 50 M
Dagger 1d4 3 10 S
Hand axe 1d6 4 20 S
Lance 1d6 5 100 L
Longbow 1d6 40 40 L
Longsword 1d8 10 30 M
Mace 1d6 5 40 M
Polearm 1d10 7 140 L
Shortbow 1d6 25 20 M
Shortsword 1d6 7 20 M
Sling 1d4 2 10 S
Spear 1d6 3 30 M
Staff 1d4 2 40 M
Two-handed sword 1d10 15 140 L
War hammer 1d6 5 40 M
Size: Denotes which characters can use this type of weapon.
Cold iron weapons: Double cost, 2d6 days to craft.
Silver weapons: Ten times cost, 2d6 days to craft.
AMMUNITION
Ammunition Cost (gp)
Arrows (quiver of 20) 5
Crossbow bolts (case of 20) 10
Sling stones Free
Singles: A single arrow costs 25cp and a single quarrel costs 5sp.
ARMOUR
Armour Cost (gp) AC Weight Bulk
Unarmoured – 10 – None
Leather 20 12 200 Light
Bark 30 13 300 Light
Chainmail 40 14 400 Medium
Pinecone 50 15 400 Medium
Plate mail 60 16 500 Heavy
Full plate 1,000 17 700 Heavy
Shield 10 +1 100 None
Italics: Usually only made and worn by mosslings.
Bulk: Denotes which characters can use this type of armour.
LODGINGS
Cost
Item Poor Com. Fanc.
Bath in private room – 5sp 4sp
Food: dessert – – 2gp
Food: main dish 1sp 3sp 2gp
Food: side dish 5cp 2sp 15sp
Lodging: common room floor, 1 night 2cp 5cp –
Lodging: double room, 1 night – – 2gp
Lodging: private room, 1 night – 8sp 1gp
Lodging: private suite, 1 night – – 5gp
Lodging: shared room (2 beds), 1 night – 4sp –
Lodging: shared room (4 beds), 1 night 2sp – –
Lodging: shared room (8 beds), 1 night 1sp – –
Personal services – – 1gp
Private dining room – – 1gp
Stabling and fodder, 1 night 2sp 4sp 6sp
Daily lifestyle expenses (optional) 5sp 2gp 10gp
Room costs: All costs are listed per person (i.e. not per room).
Lifestyle expenses: Include food and lodgings.
Coinage: 1pp = 5gp, 1gp = 10sp, 1gp = 100cp.
Pellucidium (fairy silver), gold, silver, copper pieces.

=== PAGE 201 ===
HORSES
Item Cost (gp) Load Type
Charger 250 4,000 War
Dapple-doff 40 5,000 Draft
Hop-clopper 80 5,000 Draft
Mule 30 2,500 Mule
Prigwort prancer 75 3,000 Riding
Yellow-flank 250 3,500 Riding
Load: The maximum amount of weight (in coins) the horse can
carry at normal Speed. Horses can carry double the listed load
at half Speed.
ACCESSORIES
Item Cost Weight
Feed (1 day) 5cp 100
Horse barding (+2 AC) 150gp 600
Saddle and bridle 25gp 300
Saddle bags 5gp 100
VEHICLES
Vehicle Cost (gp) Speed Cargo
Cart 100 30 10,000
Wagon 200 30 20,000
Cart: Requires 1 draft horse or 2 mules. Carries up to 20,000
coins with 2 draft horses or 4 mules.
Wagon: Requires 2 draft horses or 4 mules. Carries up to
40,000 coins with 4 draft horses or 8 mules.
CAMPING
Fetching firewood: 1d6 hours of wood per character, modi-
fied for conditions (e.g. damp: –1, snow: –2, heavy rain: –4).
Building a fire: 4-in-6 chance (or worse) in bad conditions.
Cooking: Wisdom Check. Success = +1 to sleep checks.
Natural 1 = Save Vs Doom or food ruined.
Camaraderie: Charisma Check. Success = +1 to sleep checks.
Natural 1 = Save Vs Doom or ridicule (–1 to sleep checks).
Sleep: Good night’s rest depends on gear, campfire, and
season. Success: heal 1 HP. Failure: exhausted (p151),
1-in-6 chance of failure to prepare each spell.
Surprise: Sleeping characters are automatically surprised.
COMMON FUNGI AND HERBS
Type Cost (gp) Summary of Effect
Arrowhame 100 Save versus magical disease
Blood canker 50 Cures 1d3 HP; risk of losing 1 Con.
Bosun’s balm 50 Reduces armour encumbrance
Fenob 40 Recover 1 HP overnight
Gillywort 50 Warns of poison in liquids
Grue’s ear 200 Psychedelic; increases alertness
Hogscap 125 Psychedelic; detect magic
Lankswith 15 Cures common ailments
Lilywhite 25 +1 bonus to sleep checks
Marshwick 200 Save versus animal venom
Moonhaw 100 See in utter blackness
Ofteritch 150 Save versus botanical poison
Sallow parsley 80 Gain 2 extra HP from a day’s rest
Smottlebread 25 Psychedelic; +2 to saves vs magic
Spirithame 80 Cures 1d2 Hit Points
Tom-a-merry 150 Psychedelic; see invisible
Wallowmost 150 Save versus fungal poison
Wayfarrow 100 Alleviates effects of forced march
Witch’s oyster 50 Psychedelic; oracular vision
Wolfsbane 25 Wards against werewolves
TRAVEL, FINDING FOOD
Daily Travel Points: Party’s Speed divided by 5.
Road travel: 2 Travel Points per 6 miles.
Wild travel: Entering a hex costs Travel Points. Farmland,
open forest, fungal forest, hills: 2. Bog, hilly / tangled
forest: 3. Boggy / craggy / thorny forest, swamp: 4.
Searching: Reveals hidden hex features. Costs Travel
Points (equal to entering the hex).
Finding food: Survival Check. +2 if devoting a full day.
Fishing: Only possible in lake or river hexes. Requires rod
and tackle. 2d6 fresh rations.
Foraging: 1d6 fresh rations plus chance of special.
Hunting: Fresh rations by animal Hit Points.
CALENDAR
# Month Season Days
1 Grimvold Winter 30
2 Lymewald Winter 28
3 Haggryme Winter 30
4 Symswald Spring 29
5 Harchment Spring 29
6 Iggwyld Spring 30
7 Chysting Summer 31
8 Lillipythe Summer 29
9 Haelhold Summer 28
10 Reedwryme Autumn 30
11 Obthryme Autumn 28
12 Braghold Autumn 30
Days: 1. Colly, 2. Chime, 3. Hayme,
4. Moot, 5. Frisk, 6. Eggfast, 7. Sunning.
SETTLEMENTS
# Name Size Loc.
1 Blackeswell Village E
2 Castle Brackenwold City SE
3 Dreg Village S
4 Fort Vulgar Hamlet NW
5 High-Hankle L Town SW
6 Lankshorn S Town SW
7 Meagre’s Reach Village NE
8 Odd Village N
9 Prigwort S Town C
10 Woodcutters’ Enc. Village C
Population: Hamlet 20+, village 50+,
Small town 1,000+, Large town 4,000+,
City 8,000+.
NOBLE HOUSES
# House Align Region
1 Brackenwold L Entirety
2 Guillefer N North-east
3 Harrowmoor L Central
4 Hogwarsh N South-west
5 Malbleat C South
6 Mulbreck L South
7 Murkin C West
8 Nodlock N South-west
9 Ramius N South-west